And with a herculean energy he forced the monk backwards out of
the reeling car on to the upper part of the stone ball.  Michael,
with as abrupt an agility, caught one of the beams of the cross
and saved himself from falling.  At the same instant Lucifer drove
down a lever and the ship shot up with him in it alone.

"Ha! ha!" he yelled, "what sort of a support do you find it, old
fellow?"

"For practical purposes of support," replied Michael grimly, "it
is at any rate a great deal better than the ball.  May I ask if
you are going to leave me here?"

"Yes, yes. I mount! I mount!" cried the professor in ungovernable
excitement.  "_Altiora peto_.  My path is upward."

"How often have you told me, Professor, that there is really no
up or down in space?" said the monk.  "I shall mount up as much as
you will."

"Indeed," said Lucifer, leering over the side of the flying ship.
"May I ask what you are going to do?"

The monk pointed downward at Ludgate Hill.  "I am going," he said,
"to climb up into a star."

Those who look at the matter most superficially regard paradox as
something which belongs to jesting and light journalism.  Paradox
of this kind is to be found in the saying of the dandy, in the
decadent comedy, "Life is much too important to be taken
seriously."  Those who look at the matter a little more deeply or
delicately see that paradox is a thing which especially belongs
to all religions.  Paradox of this kind is to be found in such a
saying as "The meek shall inherit the earth."  But those who see
and feel the fundamental fact of the matter know that paradox is
a thing which belongs not to religion only, but to all vivid and
violent practical crises of human living.  This kind of paradox
may be clearly perceived by anybody who happens to be hanging in
mid-space, clinging to one arm of the Cross of St. Paul's.

Father Michael in spite of his years, and in spite of his
asceticism (or because of it, for all I know), was a very healthy
and happy old gentleman.  And as he swung on a bar above the
sickening emptiness of air, he realized, with that sort of dead
detachment which belongs to the brains of those in peril, the
deathless and hopeless contradiction which is involved in the
mere idea of courage.  He was a happy and healthy old gentleman
and therefore he was quite careless about it.  And he felt as
every man feels in the taut moment of such terror that his chief
danger was terror itself; his only possible strength would be a
coolness amounting to carelessness, a carelessness amounting
almost to a suicidal swagger.  His one wild chance of coming out
safely would be in not too desperately desiring to be safe.  There
might be footholds down that awful facade, if only he could not
care whether they were footholds or no.  If he were foolhardy he
might escape; if he were wise he would stop where he was till he
dropped from the cross like a stone.  And this antinomy kept on
repeating itself in his mind, a contradiction as large and
staring as the immense contradiction of the Cross; he remembered
having often heard the words, "Whosoever shall lose his life the
same shall save it."  He remembered with a sort of strange pity
that this had always been made to mean that whoever lost his
physical life should save his spiritual life.  Now he knew the
truth that is known to all fighters, and hunters, and climbers of
cliffs.  He knew that even his animal life could only be saved by
a considerable readiness to lose it.

Some will think it improbable that a human soul swinging
desperately in mid-air should think about philosophical
inconsistencies.  But such extreme states are dangerous things to
dogmatize about.  Frequently they produce a certain useless and
joyless activity of the mere intellect, thought not only divorced
from hope but even from desire.  And if it is impossible to
dogmatize about such states, it is still more impossible to
describe them.  To this spasm of sanity and clarity in Michael's
mind succeeded a spasm of the elemental terror; the terror of the
animal in us which regards the whole universe as its enemy;
which, when it is victorious, has no pity, and so, when it is
defeated has no imaginable hope.  Of that ten minutes of terror it
is not possible to speak in human words.  But then again in that
damnable darkness there began to grow a strange dawn as of grey
and pale silver.  And of this ultimate resignation or certainty it
is even less possible to write; it is something stranger than
hell itself; it is perhaps the last of the secrets of God.  At the
highest crisis of some incurable anguish there will suddenly fall
upon the man the stillness of an insane contentment.  It is not
hope, for hope is broken and romantic and concerned with the
future; this is complete and of the present.  It is not faith, for
faith by its very nature is fierce, and as it were at once
doubtful and defiant; but this is simply a satisfaction.  It is
not knowledge, for the intellect seems to have no particular part
in it.  Nor is it (as the modern idiots would certainly say it is)
a mere numbness or negative paralysis of the powers of grief.  It
is not negative in the least; it is as positive as good news.  In
some sense, indeed, it is good news.  It seems almost as if there
were some equality among things, some balance in all possible
contingencies which we are not permitted to know lest we should
learn indifference to good and evil, but which is sometimes shown
to us for an instant as a last aid in our last agony.

Michael certainly could not have given any sort of rational
account of this vast unmeaning satisfaction which soaked through
him and filled him to the brim.  He felt with a sort of
half-witted lucidity that the cross was there, and the ball was
there, and the dome was there, that he was going to climb down
from them, and that he did not mind in the least whether he was
killed or not.  This mysterious mood lasted long enough to start
him on his dreadful descent and to force him to continue it.  But
six times before he reached the highest of the outer galleries
terror had returned on him like a flying storm of darkness and
thunder.  By the time he had reached that place of safety he
almost felt (as in some impossible fit of drunkenness) that he
had two heads; one was calm, careless, and efficient; the other
saw the danger like a deadly map, was wise, careful, and useless.
He had fancied that he would have to let himself vertically down
the face of the whole building.  When he dropped into the upper
gallery he still felt as far from the terrestrial globe as if he
had only dropped from the sun to the moon.  He paused a little,
panting in the gallery under the ball, and idly kicked his heels,
moving a few yards along it.  And as he did so a thunderbolt
struck his soul.  A man, a heavy, ordinary man, with a composed
indifferent face, and a prosaic sort of uniform, with a row of
buttons, blocked his way.  Michael had no mind to wonder whether
this solid astonished man, with the brown moustache and the
nickel buttons, had also come on a flying ship.  He merely let his
mind float in an endless felicity about the man.  He thought how
nice it would be if he had to live up in that gallery with that
one man for ever.  He thought how he would luxuriate in the
nameless shades of this man's soul and then hear with an endless
excitement about the nameless shades of the souls of all his
aunts and uncles.  A moment before he had been dying alone.  Now
he was living in the same world with a man; an inexhaustible
ecstasy.  In the gallery below the ball Father Michael had found
that man who is the noblest and most divine and most lovable of
all men, better than all the saints, greater than all the
heroes--man Friday.
