They found that inhaling a mist with a salt content of 7 or 9% improved lung function and, in some cases, produced less absenteeism from school or work. 
The salt water solution "really opens up a new avenue for approaching patients with cystic fibrosis and how to treat them," says Dr Gail Weinmann, of the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, which sponsored one of the studies. 
The team found that the 83 volunteers who regularly inhaled a 7% mist of salty water had fewer breathing problems and less absenteeism from school or work than those who inhaled a solution with a salt content of under 1%. 
"Adding salt [and water] to the airway surfaces of patients with cystic fibrosis is beneficial" for both children and adults, they conclude. 
The Australian and German researchers say the discovery may help scientists to develop vaccines that restore immunity in people with systemic or 'whole body' infections. 
Villadangos and colleagues managed to restore immunity in mice with an immune system compromised by sepsis.
They injected them with a live vaccine made of dendritic cells that had been exposed to a secondary virus in the laboratory, and subsequently displayed antigens of that virus. 
"We should be able to take dendritic cells from a patient with sepsis or malaria and expose them to antigens of the virus of a secondary infection and inject them back into the patient.
"This strategy is already being used in the development of anti-cancer vaccines. We are yet to find out if will work against secondary infections in humans with a systemic infection," Villadangos says.
"We weren't quite sure how bright it was going to be and some people didn't think we would see anything," says Brownlee, who slipped outside the Utah base with some of his team members to try to spot the capsule's streak across the sky. 
"Visual appeal can be assessed within 50 milliseconds, suggesting that web designers have about 50 milliseconds to make a good impression," the Canadian researchers report in the March/April issue of the journal Behaviour & Information Technology.
The appeal of a website is usually tied to colour, movement and interactivity, she says, with the way the information is structured coming second.
The DNA study paints a vivid picture of human evolution and survival, and correlates with the well-established written and oral histories of Jewish migrations, says Dr Doron Behar of the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, who worked on the study. 
They did not find the markers in most of the non-Jewish people they sampled, and only a very few were shared with Jews of other origin.
Scientists hope to gain an insight into the secret life of clouds with Australia's biggest climate experiment
The US space agency is set to shed light on Pluto with the launch of the New Horizons spacecraft this week.
Over the decades, NASA has launched probe after probe for close-up studies of Earth's sister planets. But distant Pluto has remained shrouded in mystery, with only a few fuzzy telescope pictures for scientists to ponder. 
And New Horizon's principal investigator Dr Alan Stern, with the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, agrees we have much to learn about the history of these distant objects.
The launch vehicle, an Atlas 5 rocket with two upper-stage motors and an unprecedented five solid-rocket strap-on boosters for extra punch, has successfully flown six previous missions.
Even with the 58,000 kilometre per hour boost into space, New Horizons will still need to bounce off Jupiter's massive gravity field and travel for nearly a decade to reach Pluto. 
"This is a place where nature operates at vastly different temperatures and conditions than we're familiar with on Earth," says New Horizons co-investigator Professor Richard Binzel with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"We're poised to begin the exploration of a new world," adds Dr Dale Cruikshank, with the NASA Ames Research Center in California.
Backpackers may one day use a mobile travel assistant to ring home and network with other travellers while finding out the cost of a bus ticket to Bondi Beach, an Australian researcher says.
The digital travel buddy would also act as a travel guide with information about the best places to go and how to get there, says Jeff Axup, a PhD student at the University of Queensland and former backpacker.
"We like to look at how people naturally act and try to come up with technology to fit their needs."
Axup's latest research includes prototypes of the technology, which is being developed with the Australasian CRC for Interaction Design.
University of Maryland researchers asked 20 young people to watch movie segments lasting 15 to 30 minutes, taken from comedy films and serious films, with at least 48 hours between the two sessions. 
Georges says the long-necked turtle is familiar with its environment and may even have learnt to avoid roads.
But if the road safety message hasn't sunk in it may be necessary to build tunnels under roads to provide them with safe passage, he says.
Asia suffered most with 220 landslides in the past century out of about 500 that caused human deaths, the scientists say. Many of the most deadly mudslides were in Latin America and the costliest in Europe. 
They identify a contaminated cooling tower at a petrochemical plant as the source of the outbreak, which killed 21 of the 86 people with laboratory-confirmed infection.
Most of the victims lived within 6 kilometres of the plant, although one lived 12 kilometres away. 
The fatality rate is "striking" when compared with past community-acquired outbreaks, in which fatality rates were 1 to 11%, the researchers note.
"There are measures and guidelines for managing cooling towers contaminated with legionella," Nguyen says. "However, how well they have been adopted and implemented depends on the individual country and setting."
The map is dated to 1763 but is also clearly marked that it is a copy of a map made in 1418. That date coincides with Zheng He's voyages, from 1405 to 1432. 
The new fridge magnets will be aware of others on the fridge and communicate with them
Proske is working with researchers at the Future Applications Lab of the Viktoria Institute in Sweden to develop the intelligent fridge magnets.
Each fridge magnet consists of 16-character liquid crystal display, rather than a magnetic strip with a printed word, Proske says.
As you compose a poem, placing words in grammatical order, the magnets communicate with each other to learn the grammar rules you are using.
"So the actual word that's associated with each magnet can change depending on the way in which it's aligned," says Proske.
If the magnets at home read, for example, "Crazy kangaroos dream wildly", those at work might change to "Drunk wallabies laze around the pool", in keeping with the Australian theme.
In the second phase, the same volunteers were each placed in a magnetic resonance imaging scanner, a device which shows blood flows within the brain. 
Men who watched "unfair" actors suffering did show an activation of their nucleus accumbens, the part of the brain associated with the satisfaction of reward. This activation was not seen in most female volunteers.
"We empathise with others if they cooperate and act fairly. But in contrast, selfish and unfair behaviour compromises this empathic link," she says. 
"Our results provide evidence for geometrical intuitions in the absence of schooling, experience with graphic symbols or maps, or a rich language of geometrical terms." 
Bacteria in dirt may be 'born' with a resistance to antibiotics, which could help shed light on the problem of drug-defying superbugs, Canadian researchers say.
"Without exception, every strain ... was found to be multi-drug resistant to seven or eight antibiotics on average, with two strains being resistant to 15 of 21 drugs," the scientists write. 
Cleaning bathrooms could become a chore of the past with new coatings on bench surfaces, tiles and glass that do the job for you, say Australian researchers.
"If you can have self-cleaning materials, you can do the job properly without having to use disinfectants and other chemicals," says Amal, based at the University of New South Wales in Sydney.
Surfaces coated with the titanium dioxide nanoparticles also have another property, called 'superhydrophilicity' that helps them self-clean. This is when water does not form droplets, but rather runs straight off the surface, washing as it goes.
They have been doping titanium dioxide nanoparticles with a small amounts of other elements such as iron or nitrogen, in place of titanium or oxygen.
Lab trials show that glass coated with the new nanoparticles can be activated by visible light from a lamp to kill bacteria Escherichia coli, and degrade volatile organic compounds.
Amal says recent concerns about the toxicity of nanoparticles should not apply to those in the self-cleaning coatings because they are chemically glued to surfaces with polyethylene glycol, and so are not free to float in the air.
Yet another study in the same publication concludes that female swordtails prefer male swordtails with big, striped swords. 
"It is not terribly rigid and cannot be manipulated very efficiently," says Dr Kari Benson, who co-authored the first paper with Dr Alexandra Basolo. "It is not useful as a weapon. It is only used as a visual signal in a fight."
The researchers staged duels between swordtails (Xiphophorus helleri), by putting two comparably sized males with different-sized swords in a tank and then observing their interactions, which usually involved aggressive behaviour, such as chasing and biting. 
Repeatedly, the male with the bigger sword won. Often all he had to do was to show his sword and then the other male slunk away.
"One part I was a bit amazed with was that in the sword manipulation experiment; somehow the fish were able to determine their own artificial sword sizes.
"I think people usually think that fish are not too bright. Not only were these swordtails able to assess their competitors' apparent sword length, but also they were able to compare that with their own sword length. I thought that was a cool result." 
"The findings are also interesting because this precipitation pattern may have left pockets of ice scattered across Mars. This is good information for NASA as officials plan future space missions, particularly with astronauts."
Kruszelnicki says the most important scientific discovery is that you can't mix sewage with drinking water, the most over-rated is the internet and the biggest unanswered question is why the Moon is larger on the horizon.
Dr Mitchell Joachim, part of the MIT Media Lab's Smart Cities Group, along with ecological engineer Dr Lara Greden and architect Javier Arbona, propose a home that is actually an ecosystem. 
The Fab Tree Hab goes beyond sustainable housing and so-called green design, building with materials that have a low impact on the environment and human health. 
In Joachim's vision, the exterior of the living house is shaped over the course of several decades into a protective crisscross of vines, interspersed with soil pockets and growing plants. 
He proposes constructing windows manufactured from soy-based plastics that would flex with the home as it grows. 
Macmillan says just as humans looking for the bathroom in the middle of the night grope around with their hands, yabbies in dark or murky waters use their antennae to orientate themselves.
"This had nothing to do with money," Lyngtveit insists. 
Not all molecules exhibit chemiluminescence. But mix psilocin with acidic potassium permanganate and psilocybin with ruthenium and magic happens.
Traces of teeth mutilation have been found in all parts of the world except Europe, with the practice reaching its peak from 700 to 1400 AD, during the height of the Viking Age.
The tools that the Vikings used for handicrafts were made both of iron and stone. An experiment on a medieval tooth showed that with a lot of force and a file of steel, it takes about 20 minutes to cut a mark like the those of the Vikings in the enamel.
The international team says the planet's relatively small size and large orbit imply a rocky-icy composition with a thin atmosphere.
Brody also did a psychological profile of the volunteers to see whether they had an anxious or neurotic character, and evaluated their work stress and satisfaction with their partners.
Dr Orson Sutherland and team at the Australian National University's Space Plasma Power and Propulsion Group designed and built the engine with the European Space Agency (ESA).
"The underlying technology has been around for 40 years," he says. "All we did with the DS4G is to add some extra components which basically gave it a 10-fold improvement."
Sutherland says missions to Pluto and the Kuiper Belt would be "quite easily" made, with trips out beyond the solar system also more feasible.
"All of that within the working lifetime of a mission scientist," he says.
Liddicoat hopes this will one day make it possible to create materials with specific degrees of flexibility, durability and tensile strength.
Along with Dr Mark Norell, curator of the museum's palaeontology division, Nesbitt reported the finding in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 
The creature had large eyes, a beak, a long tail and no teeth. Walking on two feet with its tail erect, it lived at the end of the Triassic with some of the earliest dinosaurs. 
"We don't know what the animal ate because it has a beak, and extant animals with beaks can eat almost anything," says Nesbitt. 
"We find that ethanol can, if it is made correctly, contribute significantly to both energy and environmental goals. However, the current way of producing ethanol with corn probably only meets energy goals," says Dr Alexander Farrell at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Currently, ethanol is not a significant source of fuel, but is blended with petrol. Environmentalists hope it could be developed as a cleaner source of fuel than oil or gas. 
"Ethanol can be, if it's made the right way with cellulosic technology, a really good fuel," says Farrell, an assistant professor of energy and resources. 
"At the moment, cellulosic technology is just too expensive. If that changes, and the technology is developing rapidly, then we might see cellulosic technology enter the commercial market within five years." 
"Credible studies show that with plausible technology developments, biofuels could supply some 30% of global demand in an environmentally responsible manner without affecting food production," says Professor Steven Koonin, chief scientist for BP in London, writes in a commentary. 
"Low-carbohydrate diets for weight management are far from healthy, given their association with ketosis, constipation or diarrhoea, halitosis, headache and general fatigue to name a few," they say. 
A US firm that handles the company's relations with the media says it cannot comment on the paper published in The Lancet.
Going without a drink can make you more sensitive to pain, a study has found.
"The sensation with the most immediate implications for survival is pushed to the forefront of attention," says Farrell.
"They've got this plastic mask holding their head perfectly still and they've got both arms spread out, one of them with a hypertonic solution going into one vein and the other one getting radioactive isotopes. It would have been intolerable," he says.
But there is a third possibility, says Cowie. The snails might have flown without birds.
The genetic code of marsupials has been documented for the first time with the sequencing of the opossum genome
South American and Australian marsupials split about 70 million years ago with the break up of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, and continued to evolve separately.
By looking at Japanese people with different types of earwax, they identified the gene ABCC11, which codes for a type of cell channel.
The authors compared the gene with earwax genes from 33 different populations around the world, plotting a time-map of where and when the gene mutated.
They conclude that the change in the channel type first occurred in northeast Asia, a change that then spread throughout Asia, and to Native American and Inuit populations with Asian origins.
Her colleague Dr Menna Jones, a conservation biologist from the University of Tasmania, says the cell line transmission theory is backed by her own research, done with Rodrigo Hamede, into devil fighting and biting behaviour.
The study will monitor the impact of isolating an estimated 300-400 devils that live on Tasmania's Forestier and Tasman peninsulas, where the disease hasn't yet established a stronghold. They will be separated from the mainland with devil-proof grates.
No one will be inside the free-flying suit. Rather, it is stuffed with old clothes, batteries and a couple of electronics boxes. An antenna is fixed to the suit's helmet.
Because its orbit is relatively low, it will be pulled back into Earth's atmosphere within a few weeks or months and be incinerated.
It's equipped with a series of messages that last 30 seconds and a picture that will be continuously transmitted for as long as its batteries hold out. 
SuitSat also contains a CD with hundreds of pictures, artwork, poems and signatures of students worldwide. 
"All you need is an antenna, the bigger the better, and a radio receiver that you can tune to 145.990 MHz FM," says Frank Bauer with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. "A police band scanner or a hand-talkie ham radio would work just fine." 
The virus, also known as Grew.A or MyWife, tricks users by appearing as an email attachment with subject lines such as Hot Movie, give me a kiss and Miss Lebanon 2006.
"It claims to be a movie or picture with some sort of sexual content," says Johannes Ullrich, chief research officer at the nonprofit SANS Institute research group. "That is how it tricks you." 
The new study, published in the February issue of the Journal of Archaeological Science, suggests that the bond between humans and dogs coincides with canine burials. 
"[This] was a time of major population expansion, starting with, for our purposes, colonisation for the first time of eastern Eurasia and finally on into the New World," says author Darcy Morey, an assistant professor in archaeology from the University of Kansas.
The burials reveal our evolving relationship with dogs. Often dog skeletons lay alongside human ones. 
Dogs buried without humans in North and Central America still show a loving touch and possibly a ritualised internment.
A grave found in what is now Rhode Island, for example, contains a prehistoric dog that was arranged to lie on its left side with its front paw under its head. 
The age and condition of the dogs when they died also reveal domestication and the bond with humans, according to Morey.
Christyann Darwent, an assistant professor of anthropology at the University of California at Davis, says she agrees with Morey's time window for dog domestication. 
"We must remember that we have manipulated them so much with domestication that they often must depend upon us now for their survival."
Speculation has now shifted to the 3 minute barrier, although most experts agree that athletes are unlikely to meet this without some sort of assistance.
But humans will reach a stage where they simply can't get any better without some form of modification, he says.
Pigeons will soon be equipped with a mobile phone to text their air pollution reports back to us on the ground
They have built a prototype of the pigeons' equipment, containing a mobile phone circuit board with SIM card and communication chips, a GPS receiver, and sensors capable of detecting carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide. 
"We are combining an air pollution sensor with a homemade [mobilephone]," da Costa told New Scientist.
If this transporter is switched off, as in cancerous cells, disease fighters cannot be moved where they need to go within the cell to do their job. 
It could take up to six months to develop a vaccine should human-to-human transmission occur. With smaller dose sizes, a hundred times more vaccine shots could be made within the same period of time. 
Smaller doses will also make some vaccines, including that for smallpox and anthrax, less toxic and therefore better tolerated by those with weaker immune systems, Jefferies says. 
Jefferies says the team is currently trying the method out with prototype vaccines that could lead to clinical trials in the next two years, depending on funding. 
The scientists suspect the ice is in large grains, probably aggregates. And the deposits are impure, with only a small fraction being water ice, the rest consisting of dust.
Some astronomers believe comets 'seeded' Earth with some of the water and carbon-based molecules that make up living things.
"They maintained an intimate relationship with their environment and were capable of understanding exactly where and when particular resources could be found in abundance," Adler says. 
These skills included understanding the sounds in words, familiarity with letters and verbal fluency.
But the research shows the significance of supporting pre-school age children who are having difficulties with letters and words.
Identifying children with problems
"There is evidence that early and focused intervention for potential reading disorders in children with family histories of dyslexia can lead to grade-level performance in the early school years," he says.
Rollo and his colleagues describe in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology how he found two typical mutations common among men with reduced sperm mobility.
A high percentage of men with such a condition are sterile, according to the museum that stores &#214;tzi the iceman.
"This not improbable hypothesis raises new questions concerning his social rank within his society," it adds, arguing that the new evidence supports a theory that views the man as a social outcast. 
Plants are not so lucky. Peppers infected with this virus can experience stunted growth and sunken brown spots that look like rot on the fruit.
"For example, if we want to look at the viruses associated with gastrointestinal problems, we will need a baseline to compare against." 
"One might then wonder whether this is simply a relatively unique finding to one or few individuals with a specific dietary proclivity. But these investigators show that the findings are relevant to a diverse group of humans." 
"It is probably the case that these viruses have been with us for some time," Relman says.
A waiting room questionnaire will make it easier for doctors to spot people anxious about their health, but with no physical symptoms, psychologists say
It found 6.2% of the population presented with a primary diagnosis of hypochondriasis.
"This is more than just a psychosomatic condition. It's a condition where the patient actually believes that they have something seriously wrong with themselves," Franklin says.
Patients with hypochondriasis, or health anxiety as psychologists prefer to describe it, usually complain of physical symptoms, but these tend to be vague and non-specific.
Franklin says it's important to identify patients with health anxiety because, along with children in the first year of life and people in their last, this group uses the lion's share of health resources.
Wouldn't it be great if your computer could recognise when you're frustrated with it and adjust itself to calm you down? Emotion-sensing technology could someday allow a computer to do just that, researchers say. 
"With humans, somebody who ignores the feelings of others is not liked as much as somebody who shows some sort of emotional feedback. Why should it be different with computers?" says Peter.
Current methods for collecting the data require researchers to wire users with electrodes and monitor their behaviour in a laboratory. 
Peter and his team are working on technology that unobtrusively senses a person's emotions while they interact freely with a computer.
Australian researchers are seeking the country's first licences to make stem cell lines from freshly created human embryos with genetic abnormalities.
Dr David Cram of Monash IVF and his colleague, stem cell pioneer Professor Alan Trounson, are also seeking access to embryos with genetic diseases.
"They're growing fresh crystals, so while the cloud appears to be a continuous sheet extending well out from the storm there's actually a life cycle within the cloud."
Does RU-486, otherwise known as Mifeprex or mifepristone, have side-effects? And how does it compare with surgical abortions?
But advocates of RU-486 say that decision should rest solely with health experts at the Therapeutic Goods Administration, as it does for other drugs in Australia.
She says that in 95% of cases, a miscarriage induced by mifepristone used in combination with a prostaglandin requires no further treatment. 
"In about 5%, as is the case for natural miscarriage, a minor surgical procedure is required to complete the abortion. This means that 95% of women who would otherwise have required an operative procedure could avoid it with the use of mifepristone," she says.
And he says that if doctors are not supported by services that could deal with emergency complications out of hours, this would "substantially increase the risks to women undergoing termination".
Hundreds of thousands of businesses raced to snap up '.eu' internet domain names, with 'sex.eu' taking the prize for the most sought-after address on the first day companies could apply.
Within the first hour, sex.eu domain had received 23 applications, followed by schumacher.eu with 15, realestate.eu with 12 and business.eu also with 12 applications, according to the European Registry of Internet Domain Names (Eurid). 
Germans led the way by mid afternoon making up a little more than 30% of the total applications received to date followed by the Netherlands with 16% percent and France with just over 10%. 
But there are also theoretical reasons to believe that a species can split into two within its own area, a phenomenon known as sympatric speciation.
His comments follow the discovery of a world teeming with new species, giant flowers and rare wildlife showing no fear of humans.
The bird was an orange-faced honeyeater, a bird with a bright orange face-patch.
"Not only are there no people but there are no things that people bring with them: rats, dogs, pigs," says Helgen, adding these animals affect native fauna.
Animals without fear for people
"People will generally hunt within a days travel of the village," says Aplin of CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems, currently based at the Kyoto University Museum in Japan.
It would have been warm, with sporadic volcanic explosions, he says. 
"It's a very unusual skull with this crest coming off it," Clark says. "It doesn't immediately shout tyrannosaur when you first see it."
While intimate kissing with multiple partners appears to increase the risk of contracting the disease, the UK study found that recently attending a religious event was associated with a low risk.
The study, published this week in the British Medical Journal, involved about 300 teenagers aged 15 to 19 who had been admitted to hospital with a meningococcal infection.
But teens who avoid smoky parties and don't kiss with a sore throat may still be at high risk, the study suggests.
He speculates that teens with a religious lifestyle may have fewer opportunities to exchange saliva, thus putting them at low risk of the disease.
"It has so many features in common with lizards rather than other modern snakes."
"In the week after Sierra died, Sylvia was withdrawn," says Dr Anne Engh, who led the project.
"When the other females were grooming and socialising, she tended to sit alone and rarely interacted even with her other relatives." 
"After a week or two of moping around, Sylvia suddenly initiated grooming with several low-ranking females. I think that they were as surprised as I was; they seemed awfully nervous at first. Eventually, Sylvia settled into close relationships with a very low-ranking female and with Sierra's daughter, Margaret." 
In humans, this is associated with bereavement, so it is likely that baboons also grieve their dead. 
This appeared to help them cope with losses, since stress hormone levels significantly dropped afterwards.
The evidence is among the first to come from the largest star study to date, with data from 25,000 stars just released at a US astrophysics workshop.
The invasion of the dreaded cane toad across Australia has taken a new turn with research showing the toxic toads are evolving longer legs that allow them to move faster.
Toads with longer legs have the first access to virgin territory full of juicy grubs, so the evolving species is favouring this characteristic.
Put simply, if the faster ones with the longest legs were at the back, they would trample the shorter slower ones ahead.
"So even if there is no evolutionary advantage to being at the front you are still going to end up with the front guys being the fast movers," he says.
This makes them very difficult to find, says co-author Dr Dick Manchester, from CSIRO's Australia Telescope National Facility, who has been hunting pulsars with the Parkes Radio Telescope for the past seven years.
This latest research could mean that scientists will have to come up with new ideas for the way so many RRATs have formed. 
For example, information that could be used to make nuclear weapons is censored and "we've been living with that for the last 60 years", he says.
He disagrees with suggestions that it should be a matter for journals to censor what they publish or for scientists to censor themselves.
He says history is repeating itself with the latest allegations and with CSIRO's recent decision to move away from renewable energy research.
Diesendorf says withholding funding is another form of censorship, with many research grants now subject to ministerial approval and what he describes as unequal funding for Cooperative Reserch Centres (CRCs).
"Scientists are people who have expert knowledge so it means that policy decisions are made without expert knowledge or by the expert knowledge of vested interests only," he says.
"With climate change we're talking about risk to future generations. It's something that society should be paying attention to, it should be put on the agenda without fear or favour."
As they had found with the monkeys, the researchers say the babies spent significantly more time looking at the video image that matched the number of women talking. 
The findings suggest that the hormonal changes that come with menstruation contribute to girls' insomnia risk, according to the authors. 
The other possibility is that the physical changes that come with puberty, like breast development, create "social pressures" that contribute to sleep problems, says Johnson, a researcher with RTI International.
But he says menstruation is related specifically to problems with staying asleep and getting enough deep sleep. 
These forms of insomnia are more likely to have physiological causes, whereas problems with falling asleep in the first place can often be stress-related. 
"We have identified the groups at risk, including fetishists and followers of the voodoo cult who sometimes kill animals with their teeth," says Guillaume Hounsou-ve, director of livestock at Benin's agriculture ministry.
Priests commonly kill birds by ripping their throats out with their teeth or using a knife to cut their heads off.
Both methods would bring them into contact with chicken blood, one of the ways bird flu is thought to be spread to humans. 
Many took their voodoo beliefs with them to the New World, notably Haiti, where rites and traditions from different parts of Africa met and evolved. 
On Monday 20 February, the providers of Kazaa will appeal against this decision. And the EFA, with the New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties and the Australian Consumers' Association, is applying to take part in the appeal.
"You could end up with a situation where the only people who produce products are the ones already tied in with the music labels," says Clapperton.
"There is no evidence that there is any reduction in competition or innovation following the decision," says the spokesperson. "The opposite has happened with the launch of many more digital download services including iTunes."
But when he went back to validate the variables he had used with the Kankanaey people he found his model was seriously flawed.
Even when water was scarce, people upstream shared water equally with those downstream because they had helped to build the irrigation system in the first place.
Maori culture, for example, has a different concept of numbers, says Alangui. While western culture uses the number 'three' as an adjective, in for example the phrase 'three glasses', Maori talk of glasses interacting with each other, and as being in the act of 'three-ing'.
For nearly a month, a huge storm with massive lightning has been raging on Saturn under the watchful eye of the Cassini spacecraft. 
Researchers now are working hard to identify spots within the storm that could be lightning. 
"Cassini's radio detector is on all the time," says planetary meteorologist Professor Andrew Ingersoll, with the California Institute of Technology and a member of the Cassini science team.
The radio emissions are similar to the popping and crackling that you might hear if you were driving through a thunderstorm with an AM radio on.
On Saturn, the phenomena manifests itself on a gigantic scale, with lighting bolts more than 1000 times stronger than strikes on Earth, the radio data reveals. The storm itself spans an area larger than continental US. 
Their findings were confirmed by the Cassini images shot in darkness with illumination from the planet's rings.
When faced with a major decision, such as buying a car or a house, it's best to do your homework, then forget about it for a while and let your unconscious churn through the options.
Four investigators in the department of psychology at the University of Amsterdam, confirm the value of what they call the "deliberation-without-attention" hypothesis in a series of studies on consumer choice.
After working on the puzzles, this group of shoppers reported greater satisfaction with their car choice than the people who were given no puzzles and had to decide which car to buy immediately after consciously pondering the facts. 
"Once you have the information, you have to decide, and this is best done with conscious thought for simple decisions, but left to unconscious thought, to 'sleep on it', when the decision is complex." 
The trial, carried out at the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute with the University of Melbourne and the Royal Adelaide Hospital, recently tested a vaccine made by CSL Ltd of Melbourne.
CSL today announced that the vaccine triggered an immune response it predicts will equate with "a good level of protection" in "about half" of the 400 healthy adult volunteers tested. 
It was then grown up in fertilised chicken eggs, killed and mixed with an aluminium phosphate adjuvant before being given to volunteers.
"It is exciting, really ... I don't think there's been anywhere else that's been able to get that sort of immunological response with two doses of 15 micrograms," says Plant, who also sits on the federal government's National Influenza Pandemic Action Committee.
"If the pandemic came tomorrow, the risks would be so high that we would say that it was worth going with it even if we didn't have the data."
Encapsulating insulin producing cells in tiny seaweed bubbles and injecting them into people with type 1 diabetes could one day remove the need for daily insulin injections, an Australian researcher says.
Tuch says if the trial works, it will mean that insulin producing cells, or islets, can be transplanted, effectively reversing type 1 diabetes, without the need for immunosuppressive drugs.
"The concept of the seaweed is that it forms a coating around the islets ... with holes that are small enough to prevent immune cells entering," Tuch says.
The trial, involving a 51-year woman who was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes 40 years ago, is the first of its kind in Australia.
During Monday's half-hour procedure the woman was injected with 75,000 capsules containing a total of around 200,000 islet cells.
"You blow the air and the alginate and the cells together and it's like blowing soap bubbles; they come out with the cells inside the capsules."
The capsules were injected into the patient's abdomen where it's hoped they will start producing insulin within 24 hours, allowing her to slowly begin reducing her insulin injections. 
Immunologist Dr Bronwyn O'Brien, who is working with a team from the University of Technology Sydney to genetically engineer liver cells so they produce insulin, says Tuch's method is promising but may have complications.
So, on behalf of NASA and the now independently funded Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, or SETI, she narrowed down the list to stars that could have planets with liquid water orbiting them. 
"We want to see these habitable planets with our own eyes," she adds. So the star cannot be too bright, or it will obscure the planet. 
Some are too gassy to have spawned planets like Earth, which contains a lot of metal. Others have massive companions whose gravity could interfere with the steady conditions needed for life to evolve. 
Some children with autism really can empathise with others, researchers say
People with autism are more intelligent and able to function better than previously believed, experts say.
At a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, researchers presented reports showing that even people with autism who do not speak can have above-average intelligence.
"The current figures are that 75% of autistic people are mentally retarded, with the mute the most ... impaired," says Canadian researcher Dr Laurent Mottron, an autism researcher at Montreal's H&ocirc;pital Rivi&egrave;re-des-Prairies. 
Professor Morton Gernsbacher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison questioned a common idea among autism researchers that autistic people lack a 'theory of mind'. This, among other things, gives an ability to empathise with others.
She says it is impossible to find out how many cases of autism there were in the past, because many people with autism were often diagnosed as retarded, or never diagnosed.
Grether says US researchers have begun taking prenatal blood samples from pregnant women and will look for clues when and if some of their children are diagnosed with autism.
The studies found no link with vaccines, says Dr Irving Gottesman, a psychiatrist at the University of Minnesota, but says the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has initiated four studies "to tie up the loose ends". 
Link with vaccines
Gernsbacher, the mother of a child with autism, says some parents may join these lobbying groups over the advice of doctors because they get "pat answers" to initial concerns about their children.
Leaves with jagged edges like these maple leaves allow better uptake of nutrients at the start of the growing season, when temperatures are cooler
Leaves with 'toothed' edges help trees, shrubs and other plants cope with the cold, US researchers say.
Dr Dana Royer, who authored the study with Dr Peter Wilf at Pennsylvania State University, says that the jagged, pointy edges on leaves are packed with xylem, a tissue that transports water and nutrients in sap.
"In the springtime when leaves are just starting to leaf out, leaves with teeth are, on average, losing more water than leaves without teeth," says Royer, now an assistant professor of earth and environmental sciences at Wesleyan University. 
"This loss of water helps pull more sap up from the roots. Thus trees with toothed leaves probably have a higher rate of sap flow early in the spring than toothless leaves.
"This is important because it delivers nutrients to the developing leaves, helping to 'jumpstart' their photosynthetic season. As you move to colder and colder climates with shorter and shorter growing seasons, it becomes increasingly beneficial to have teeth," he adds. 
The researchers measured such moisture evaporation, or transpiration, and photosynthesis activity for leaves on 60 woody species from two regions with differing climates: Pennsylvania and North Carolina. 
They determined that both energy-gathering activity and transpiration increased at jagged leaf edges by up to 45% during the first 30 days of the spring growing season. Leaves without teeth did not exhibit such a marked increase. 
"I think the authors have identified a very interesting problem and have made progress toward trying to answer it. As to whether this is the ultimate answer, that remains to be seen with further studies, but the authors have kicked off a promising line of research," Parrish says.
Royer says the research is important because "we on Earth today are experiencing rapid climate change. A problem with trying to understand our current climate change is that it is an unreplicated experiment".
"Here we were with these highly sophisticated monitoring devices that tell us all sorts of things about our critically ill patients and here we are doing something as old fashioned as looking at urine," she says.
Foot says a GP who sees a patient with red urine may jump to conclusions about something sinister.
Circuit boards of the future could house smaller, more powerful chips made with existing technology
McBride says there's no doubt that the latest season was the most ferocious in recent times, with a series of vicious cyclones including Hurricane Katrina that devastated New Orleans.
He says the report also questions claims that tropical cyclones have become more intense over the past 50 years, saying data used in the past may be inaccurate or incomplete because of limitations with the technology of the day.
As a result, almost all sharks are within reach of modern deep-sea trawlers, which can net fish to a depth of up to 2300 metres. 
"All populations are therefore within reach of human fisheries, and there is no hidden reserve of chondrichthyan biomass or biodiversity in the deep sea.  Sharks may be more vulnerable to over-exploitation than previously thought."
Professional dancers are born with at least two special genes that give them a leg up on the rest of us, according to a new study.
With dancing added to the list, the evidence indicates that certain individuals are born with a predisposition to specific behaviours and talents, and that at least some of these qualities may represent evolved attributes. 
"People are born to dance," says Ebstein. "They have [other] genes that partially contribute to musical talent, such as coordination, sense of rhythm. However, the genes we studied are more related to the emotional side of dancing - the need and ability to communicate with other people and a spiritual side to their natures that not only enable them to feel the music, but to communicate that feeling to others via dance." 
Ebstein agrees that genes are not the whole story. He says those of us without a twinkle-toed predisposition can still become good dancers, since "it's not only a question of having the right genes, but also training and motivation, that make professional dancers".
In general, a standard computer will require 10^n steps to find the factors of a number with 'n' digits.
There may be many possible algorithms that solve a problem, or paths to get from A to B. But the ones with the least number of steps are equivalent to the path taken by the free-falling ball.
"Although definitive orbits cannot be derived, both new satellites appear to be moving in circular orbits in the same orbital plane as Charon with orbital periods of about 38 days for P1 and 25 days for P2," they write. 
First with multiple satellites
The creatures were still in a microscopic larval state and could only be identified with a DNA test.
University researchers have, for example, found better ways of preparing bone collagen for analysis. This involves a process of ultrafiltration, which removes contaminants with a lower molecular weight, such as organic salts and humic acids.
He says the invasion could have been helped by a major change in the climate that modern man would have been technologically and culturally better equipped to deal with than the more primitive Neanderthals. 
"There are increasing indications that over many areas of Europe, the final demise of the Neanderthal populations may have coincided with the sudden onset of very much colder and drier climatic conditions," Mellars writes. 
"This could have delivered the coup de grace to the Neanderthals in many parts of western and central Europe in their economic and demographic competition with the incoming modern groups," he adds.
But rather than marketing such a GM wheat, they plan to select for plants with the right genetic make up and breed them the conventional way.
There are a number of enzymes that convert amylose to amylopectin and one of the important parts of the research was to identify the critical enzyme that needed to be silenced to give wheat with high-amylose starch.
The rats' faeces also had increased levels of short-chain fatty acids, which have been associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, the researchers say.
But ecstasy has increasingly been linked with health problems such as depression, especially where individuals have used the drug heavily over a long time.
Individuals with signs of anxiety and depression in 1983 showed an increased risk of starting to use ecstasy. 
But when scientists first detected it with NASA's Swift satellite on 18 February, the explosion was about 25 times closer and lasted 100 times longer than a typical gamma-ray burst. 
Scientists will attempt observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory.
The researchers went out onto Sydney roads with a modified vacuum cleaner to suck up samples, the first study to look at polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and nicotine in road dust.
He says any pollutants that fall on roads can easily wash off into the stormwater system with the slightest rain. 
Nicotine, most likely from tossed away cigarette butts, is an alkaloid with a half-life in the environment of 30 days and can be toxic to aquatic organisms.
The researchers monitored 32 patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD, who had stopped taking their acid-suppressing medication.
Impedance allows researchers to evaluate how far reflux extends up from the stomach, measure the volume of reflux, and evaluate acidity with greater precision.
Episodes that caused symptoms showed a larger increase in acidity within the oesophagus, more acidity, and extended further up the oesophagus. 
Symptoms were more likely with gas reflux if they were accompanied by a rise in acidity. 
"Not with a team of IAEA-type inspectors, though, but an expanding global network of scientists." 
"How do you balance a possible negative threat on the one hand with a possible good on the other?" says Kluge. "This is the two-edged sword that accompanies any research."
Previously it was thought that these were just psychosomatic symptoms. But for many such dads it is likely that the changes help them to cope with the rigours of fatherhood once the baby is born.
The extra weight, which was not associated with copied eating habits, occurred gradually over the gestation periods, which are five months for marmosets and about six months for tamarins.
The extra padding is not the only pregnancy symptom that scientists have identified in the monkey dads. The males apparently are so in tune with their mates that they undergo other physiological changes.
Craft says most monogamous non-human primate dads have the following daily schedule: "feed, travel, rest and then more of the same, with just a little time in between for play."
The researchers found that people with a 'short' version of the serotonin transporter gene have an 80% chance of developing clinical depression if they have three or more negative life events in a year.
People with a 'long', or more protective, version of the gene only have a 30% risk of becoming depressed under similar circumstances.
The study, by researchers from the University of New South Wales with affiliated research institutes and teaching hospitals, evaluated the relationship between genes and life experience from young adulthood into middle age in 127 teachers across 25 years.
Mitchell says the findings could help identify people at increased risk of depression and help direct resources into preventative interventions for people with the susceptible genetic make up.
Tambora's blast also sent sulfur dioxide 43 kilometres into the air, creating a chemical chain reaction in the atmosphere that caused a year of global cooling that made 1816 "the year without a summer". 
Scientists located Tambora with help from a local guide, who told them that pottery fragments and human bones had been found in a gully. In the mid-2004 dig, scientists discovered an entombed house with two people inside. 
The house, on wooden stilts with bamboo siding and a thatched roof, had been incinerated into charcoal by the fiery ash that Sigurdsson believes was at least 538&deg;C. 
The finding is significant, Sigurdsson says, because "it means that we know that in an eruption such as that in 1815, that pyroclastic flows extend from the volcano in all directions to a distance of at least 40 kilometres radially and within that zone ... there is an extinction of all life." 
Scientists also studied the deposits of volcanic ash and documented the size of the particles and their distance from the volcano, says Steven Carey, a University of Rhode Island professor with a background in physical volcanology. 
The image is of the gigantic Pinwheel galaxy, or Messier 101, and was compiled from 51 images from the Hubble Space Telescope, with extra data from ground-based telescopes.
Inflammation after infection with the Epstein-Barr virus might trigger temporary brain damage
While most people with glandular fever recover in several weeks, disabling symptoms including prolonged fatigue can last for at least six months, known as CFS.
The study is the first to follow patients within a few weeks of acute glandular fever infection for a year.
People with CFS are often unable to work or attend school.
The position has been vacant for nine months. But Australia now has a new chief scientist whose appointment has been met with a spectrum of responses from unqualified support to downright disappointment.
"The uterus, lining of the uterus and breasts were not designed to cope with this and it causes some cells to grow and regress each month, which means a greater chance of error in the proliferation process of abnormal cells," he says.
Fraser says present day Kalahari bushwomen have about 100 periods in a lifetime compared with Western women's 450.
The Pentagon is funding research into neural implants with the ultimate hope of turning sharks into 'stealth spies' capable of gliding undetected through the ocean, a report says.
"By remotely guiding the sharks' movements they hope to transform the animals into stealth spies, perhaps capable of following vessels without being spotted." 
The next step will be to take this device outside the laboratory. Blue sharks implanted with the gadget are to be released off the coast of Florida. 
As radio signals will not penetrate the sea, communications with the fish will be made through US Navy acoustic towers capable of sending sonar signals to a shark up to 300 kilometres away. 
New Scientist says the DARPA work is controversial, but also points out that work with animal implants also has a potential benefit for medicine. 
The original Polynesian community on the Pitcairn Islands died out because it lost touch with its neighbours who provided crucial resources, an Australian archaeologist says.
A space rock capable of sub-continent scale devastation has about a one in 1000 risk of colliding with Earth early next century, the highest of any known asteroid, watchers say.
"The risk of an impact within the next century [is] higher than that of any other known asteroid," he says, stressing however that the likelihood of a hit is small. 
Apophis, measuring 300 metres across and with a mass of less than 100 million tonnes, will fly by at a distance of 36,350 kilometres from the Earth's surface on 13 April 2029.
This is equivalent to global seas rising 0.4 millimetres a year, with a margin of error of 0.2 millimetres, the researchers say.
Their mannequin, called ADAM (ADvanced Automotive Mannequin), together with physiological and psychological models, enabled the researchers to measure how the cool seats increases "thermal comfort" and reduces the need for air-conditioning.
"Up to 25% of the engine power is used for air-conditioning purposes," says Hu, who works on reducing fuel use associated with vehicle air-conditioning.
Hu says it would be easy to achieve the 7.5% savings with good seals, which would prevent the loss of cool air from windows and doors.
"Combined with broader tropical Pacific Ocean and atmosphere conditions, this is consistent with the early stages of a basin-wide La Ni&ntilde;a event," it says.
But there can also be a knock-on effect much further afield, with an increase to monsoon rainfall in South Asia, unusual coolness in tropical West Africa, Southeast Africa, Japan and the Korean peninsula.
It would travel up to 3.36 billion kilometres before eventually burning up upon friction with the atmosphere. 
The ball will be fitted with a small radio transmitter allowing golf fans to track the ball on their home computer, says the company, which says it will give the club to charity. 
But, as experienced golfers will tell you, driving that little white ball with the right force and in the right direction is a lot harder than it seems, even on a terrestrial course. 
But the fruit of the Syzygium maire or swamp maire tops the lot, with 18 times the concentration.
All organisms produce free radicals when they are stressed. Normally the organism can deal with them by producing its own antioxidants to mop up them up. But too many antioxidants can cause damage.
Finding plants with such high concentrations of antioxidants may prove doubly beneficial, the researchers say.
Sun-spawned cosmic storms that can play havoc with earthly power grids and orbiting satellites could be 50% stronger in the next 11-year solar cycle than in the last one, scientists say.
Every 11 years or so, the Sun goes through an active period, with lots of sunspots. This is important as solar storms, linked to twisted magnetic fields that can hurl out energetic particles, tend to occur near sunspots. 
But scientists do not agree whether the active period will start within months, late 2006 or early 2007, or years, with the first signs in late 2007 or early 2008.
"What we have here is a prediction that the cycle is going to be very active, and what we need and what we're of course working on is to be able to predict individual storms with a couple days or hours in advance so the grids can take the action," Behnke says.
"If we try to deal with all the sensory information directed at us at any given time, it's overwhelming. We can't focus attention on crucial changes in our environment that aren't a function of our own motions." 
To determine which of the two mechanisms is at work, the researchers asked 20 right-handed people to tap with one index finger on a force sensor that was sandwiched between the tapping finger and the other hand's passive index finger.
Flanagan also explains that a breakdown in this prediction process could be why people with delusional schizophrenia "hear voices" and mumble to themselves. 
He is not certain whether some people with schizophrenia can tickle themselves, but since their falsely alien sensations are often accompanied by feelings of fear and paranoia, it is likely that the experience would not be pleasurable. 
Both Frith and Flanagan hope that the findings will help people with schizophrenia, which the US National Institute of Mental Health says affects around 51 million people worldwide. 
"[We need] robust techniques for measuring the magnitude of the [prediction] breakdown. If techniques like the one described in the PLoS Biology paper can be used with patients, then this will have a major impact on diagnosis and the monitoring of the effects of treatment," Frith says.
"Scenes of everyday life, frozen by the volcanic deposits, testify that people suddenly left the village: the moulds of four huts, with pottery and other objects left inside; skeletons of a dog and nine pregnant goat victims found in a cage; and footprints of adults, children, and cows filled by the first fallout pumice," the researchers write in the current issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
An eruption similar to the Avellino catastrophe today would affect an area much larger than the actual danger 'red zone', which comprises a population of about 600,000 and 18 towns squashed within about a 6 kilometre radius between the volcano and the sea.
Indeed, at least 3 million people live within the area destroyed by the Avellino eruption.
"[Computer modelling shows that] within a radius of at least 12 kilometres from the volcano, the impact force and sedimentation rate of the pyroclastic surge would cause total devastation and mortality, because the inferred dynamic overpressure of surge clouds would exceed even the building strength," say the researchers. 
A gene that controls how fast your body breaks down caffeine might explain why some people can get away with drinking lots of coffee and others can't, new research suggests.
People with a genetic variation linked with slow caffeine metabolism are more likely to have a nonfatal heart attack, the researchers write today in the Journal of the American Medical Association. 
"We found in individuals who had the slow version of this gene, as little as two cups of coffee a day is associated with an increased risk of heart disease," says study author Dr Ahmed El-Sohemy of the University of Toronto. 
For those with the slow-acting gene, two to three cups of coffee a day increased their odds of a heart attack by 36%, and four or more cups a day increased the risk by 64%, the study says.
"For those who had the fast version of the gene, there was no increased risk, even with four or more cups a day," he says.
"Surprisingly, what we found was that in individuals under 50 years of age who were fast metabolisers ... consumption of as little as one to three cups a day was associated with a lower risk of heart disease." 
Those with the fast-acting gene who drank two to three cups of coffee a day had 22% reduced odds of having a heart attack, but drinking four or more cups a day lessened the risk by 1%, the study found. 
Generally horses' eyesight is on par with that of humans, the researchers say.
"They can do that just fine with that vision that they have and the reason they don't have the same type of colour vision that we have is that they just don't need it. Their eyesight is [good] for their environment."
Existing remote telecommunication networks are struggling to cope with today's internet traffic, according to one expert. So how about a new de-centralised network?
He says ad hoc networks have another advantage because they are not centralised and if devices break down they can communicate with other units and re-route messages.
For example, if a remote community has a central building with access to a satellite network, it can extend the satellite network to individual homes.
The technology could also be used to enable communications within a community. For example people could run their own broadband television station from the local community centre.
"You can have a community private network without going through any infrastructure," says Abolhasan.
While Buddhism flourished throughout Asia, it disappeared from India, Central Asia and the Indonesian archipelago, taking with it many literary traditions.
"One of the manuscripts we studied was found in a pot with an inscription on it indicating that it was donated in the year 12. While it didn't say what era that was, the characteristics of the inscription tell us that it must refer to the Kanishka era."
Snuppy, on the right, with the three-year-old male Afghan hound whose somatic skin cells were used to clone him
In trouble with stem cells
Professor Rusi Taleyarkhan with his tabletop device that he says delivers cold fusion with bubbles
"Faculty members Lefteri Tsoukalas and Tatjana Jevremovic, along with several others who do not wish to be named, say that since Taleyarkhan began working at Purdue, he has removed the equipment with which they were trying to replicate his work, claimed as 'positive' experimental runs for which they never saw the raw data, and opposed the publication of their own negative results," according to Nature. 
In his original report, published in the journal Science in 2002, Talayarkhan and colleagues say they created nuclear fusion in a beaker of chemically altered acetone by bombarding it with neutrons and then sound waves to make bubbles. 
People with diabetes are flying to a clinic in Mexico for an injection of pig cells, hoping this xenotransplant will cure them.
But experts are worried about the risks involved with this so-called xenotourism or xenotravel, both to the patient and to the rest of the community.
Cook says her correspondence with the clinic confirms patients from a country in the northern hemisphere were admitted in 2005.
"They confirmed with me that there were two people who had already received the therapy in January and February last year and since returned to their home country and they had two more people who were coming across to have a consultation," Cook says.
"If I get a xenotransplant I could walk in to my doctor and have a sore throat and just be diagnosed with a sore throat and be told to suck on some lozenges when if fact I could have something a lot more serious going on," she says. 
Until now, DVT has been most widely associated with remaining inactive for long periods, like in the cramped conditions of an aircraft cabin.
It cruised at around 11,000 metres with a cabin pressure that corresponds to an altitude of 1800-2100 metres. 
The researchers put the ring of suspicion around hypobaric hypoxia, a combination of low cabin pressure and a low oxygen level compared with terrestrial air conditions. 
This medication has side-effects, which means it should be targeted at those most at risk, such as women on the pill and with factor V Leiden, cancer patients and recent surgery patients, says Dr Hans Stricker, a doctor at the Charity Hospital in Locarno, Switzerland, in a commentary. 
"We realise that this is a radical conclusion, that we may have evidence for liquid water within a body so small and so cold," says Dr Carolyn Porco, Cassini imaging team leader at the Space Science Institute in Boulder, Colorado. 
"Water is being spewed out of this moon. It solves some real mysteries that we have been struggling with over the years." 
It is possible the plume comes directly from ice, but more likely there is a liquid source, the researchers say. It would have to be under the moon's surface, which is covered with ice. 
"Any life that existed could not be luxuriant and would have to deal with low temperatures, feeble metabolic energy, and perhaps a severe chemical environment. Nevertheless, we cannot discount the possibility that Enceladus might be life's distant outpost." 
"I think the best you can say is there is biological potential. We have liquid water probably, and it is in contact with rocks so there are minerals," she says.
Boustead says the main problem with current 'voice over internet' technology is that it is one-dimensional; there is no relationship between how someone's voice sounds and the position they are at in the virtual landscape.
But in the new system, a person's voice 'moves' around with their online character.
"You can talk to people just like in normal life, in real life. And it's quite a comfortable way of communicating with people. People are actually very used to it."
He says being able to talk to others in a crowd is important for players in computer games where co-operation with a small group within a crowd is crucial to winning. 
Telstra has been running a trial using the voice technology with several online computer games over the last few months with a small group of broadband users.
The rainbow serpent, a key Aboriginal Dreamtime creation symbol, is closely connected with Indigenous knowledge of groundwater systems
The Desert Knowledge CRC is also trying to link traditional knowledge with science in terms of water management in central Australia, home to numerous remote Indigenous communities.
Bryant points out that intrusive thoughts are not always negative. Teenagers not wishing to keep thinking about a girlfriend or boyfriend when they are meant to be concentrating on other things can find themselves dealing with the same paradox, Bryant says.
This exoplanet is 13 times the mass of Earth and is shown here with a hypothetical moon
The OGLE project detected the microlensing event in April; a total of 36 astronomers working with OGLE found the signs of a planet, 9000 light-years away in the direction of the Milky Way's central galactic bulge. 
"When they formed, they were either red-hot or white-hot and we found them in the Siberia of the solar system," says Stardust lead scientist Professor Donald Brownlee, with the University of Washington. 
Far from simple icy bodies with clouds of gas and dust, comets, or at least Comet Wild 2, now appear to be a blend of materials formed at all temperature ranges. 
And nitrous oxide is rising consistently, with levels increasing 18% in modern times.
"It is important to take the long view. There can be fluctuations," he says. "The 2.6 parts per million figure is within past experience. If it were to persist over several years, then we would have to start talking about what it means."
He advises these women should be referred to an obstetrician with a special interest in the area.
Women with a personal or family history of thrombophilia could also be referred, as could women with a history of pre-eclampsia or unexplained preterm birth.
The team is currently working with Conservation International and The Nature Conservancy to help establish conservation priorities across the globe.
Researchers at Amsterdam's Free University created a radio frequency identity (RFID) chip infected with a virus to prove that RFID systems are vulnerable despite their extremely low memory capacity. 
"An RFID tag can be infected with a virus and this virus can infect the back-end database used by the RFID software. From there it can be easily spread to other RFID tags."
As a result, they say, it is possible that criminals or militants could use an infected RFID tag to upset airline baggage handling systems with potentially devastating consequences.
The same technology could also be used to wreak havoc with the databases used by supermarkets. 
Ultrasounds are high-pitched sounds with a frequency of more than 20 kilohertz, much higher than the frequency most birds, reptiles and amphibians can hear.
Dr Paul Rothemund at the California Institute of Technology can make 50 billion smileys, each a thousand times smaller than the diameter of a human hair, with his technique.
Rothemund has been working on flat, two-dimensional shapes but says that 3D structures in DNA should be quite feasible with this technique.
"[Our] data identify neural mechanisms associated with one specific gene epidemiologically associated with risk for violent and impulsive behaviour," they say.
"All the males in that family with that mutation were arsonists and rapists," says Schofield, who heads the Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute in Sydney.
In addition, he says, animal studies have shown that mice without an MAOA gene have aggressive tendencies.
They found those with the low-expressing version of MAOA were more impulsive.
Parts of their brain associated with emotion differed in size and activity to those with the high-expressing version.
The study also found that activity of those parts of the brain in males with low-expression MAOA differed more greatly than their female counterparts.
"This expression of MAOA form is really important in terms of how a brain will deal with a social situation, whether [a person will] go over the top or not," says Rogers, who has written extensively on the relationship between genes and environment.
Biotechnology companies are profiting from living resources found in the deep ocean without laws to ensure their actions are sustainable and fair, says an Australian environmental lawyer.
On the contrary, the tsunami scoured only the eastern sides of the islands, where it struck and carried the coral beach sand over the islands. As much as 30 centimetres of sand was deposited on top of one island, with the others gaining 5 to 10 centimetres. 
But it's not clear whether it offers any clues to how the Maldives or other atolls will withstand rapid rises in sea level due to the melting of glaciers by global warming. 
The next was a coiffure resembling a melon, and the third was the regal Cleopatra in her royal Egyptian headdress, complete with a rearing cobra made of precious metal.
From the time of Egyptian King Ptolemy I, the Ptolemaic queens wore the 'melon hairstyle' with its segmented sections resembling a melon or gourd," Kleiner says.
"These same Ptolemaic queens were also depicted in art with the usual Egyptian wigged headdress that had its origins in Pharaonic times.
"These show her with the customary Egyptian wig and the triple uraeus (rearing cobra)," she says.
"This Egyptian coiffure is the one we most often associate with Cleopatra today. Think Elizabeth Taylor!" 
The uraeus was associated with a cobra goddess Wadjyt, the sun god Ra and the goddess Hathor, so wearing it signified that the individual had taken on the attributes of a divinity.
The Egyptian queen extensively travelled, and did so in style. Not unlike film depictions, Cleopatra would arrive via elegant barge with her attendants catering to her every need.
Kleiner suggests that Octavia, Antony's wife, invented a hairstyle called "the nodus" to compete with Cleopatra.
Dr David Glover, a UK drug industry consultant with extensive experience of antibody treatments, says the protein the drug targets may not be the same in all species. 
The genetic diversification of the pool of H5N1 avian influenza viruses with the potential to cause a human influenza pandemic heightens the need for careful surveillance, researchers said at the International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases in Atlanta. 
"Back in 2003 we only had one genetically distinct population of H5N1 with the potential to cause a human pandemic. Now we have two," says Dr Rebecca Garten of the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), who helped to conduct the study. 
Although it is difficult to catch bird flu, people can become infected if they come into close contact with infected birds.
"We would expect the priming [of a patient] with a clade one [vaccine] could potentially reduce the severity of disease," Cox says.
Dr Geoff Love, director of meteorology at the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) says Larry was on a par with Cyclone Tracey, which devastated Darwin in 1974.
The BOM categorises cyclones from 1 to 5, with 5 being the most severe.
Grant Beard, a climatologist with the BOM's National Climate Centre, says the recent increase in intense tropical cyclones may be linked to warming. 
"The approach is not without challenges, but it could transform the way complex mechanical systems are built," writes Dr John Madden, an assistant professor at the University of British Columbia, in the same issue of the journal.
In the first approach, the scientists coated a sheet made of pure carbon nanotubes with platinum nanoparticles. They immersed the sheet into a solution of sulfuric acid. 
The team coated a straight memory wire with platinum nanoparticles and then exposed it to vapours from methanol mixed with air. 
Female eastern whipbirds sing with a regional accent, which biologists say may be related to coordinating reproductive activities
Female whipbirds in Australia sing the same basic songs, but with regional accents, researchers show.
But the find is doubly noteworthy because the scientists observed that the males of this species, Psophodes olivaceus, sing with no accent whatsoever. 
"It is so intriguing to see both of these opposite patterns occurring within the same species," says lead researcher Daniel Mennill, a professor of behavioural ecology at the University of Windsor in Canada. 
"You wouldn't be shocked to visit one town and hear people speak with a twang, and then visit another town and hear a drawl," he says.
In the wild, the males and females sing duets. Males initiate the duet with a long whistle and an ear-splitting 'whip crack'. Females then respond with a sharp 'chew chew'. 
Peter Slater, a professor of natural history at the University of St Andrews in Scotland, agrees with the findings.
Male eastern whipbirds perhaps might have evolved accents too, if it were not for their impressive 'whip crack' song with its stunning finale.
The effect, reported in a recent issue of the journal Nature Materials, occurs at infrared light wavelengths, so it can't be seen with the human eye. 
"[But] if it worked in the visible light with molecules that make up your hand, when the laser hit your hand, your hand would go transparent," says team member Professor Chris Phillips, a physicist at Imperial College London.
The scientists accomplished their feat with materials used to make semiconductor chips.
Normally, electrons that make up atoms in these materials interact with light beams in a benign way. 
The HyShot team carried out the world's first successful scramjet test flight at Woomera in 2002 with a University of Queensland-designed engine.
That original design had a two-dimensional wedge-shaped air intake and a rectangular-shaped combustor, says Associate Professor Michael Smart, who designs scramjets with the HyShot team.
He says the new scramjet has a three-dimensional bullet-shaped intake with an elliptical shaped combustor.
By closely monitoring viruses from people infected with avian flu, scientists can get a early warning as to whether these strains are mutating into forms that will make it easier to fit into human receptors, Kawaoka says.
The headaches, colds and sniffles associated with 'sick building syndrome' are more likely a sign of poor work satisfaction, a new study shows
But those with only low levels of the symptoms worked in buildings where there was poor air circulation and unacceptably high levels of CO2, noise, fungus and airborne chemicals. 
In fact, the biggest factors linked with the symptoms were job stress and lack of support in the workplace.
He says another option is to neutralise the CO2 before sequestering it in the oceans by mixing it with alkaline minerals such as limestone.
The report says ocean sequestration could help lock up CO2 for hundreds of years, with deeper injection being more effective than shallower injection.
"We need to start serious measures to reduce greenhouse gases within the next decade. If we don't do something soon, we're committed to 4-6 metres of sea level rise in the future," he says. 
This would remove the ethical dilemma associated with stem cells derived from human embryos. 
Wood found that exposure to mobile phone radiation resulted in heightened alpha-wave activity in the brain. Alpha waves are associated with relaxation and daydreaming but normally disappear with sleep.
"Alpha waves are really only present when you're lying awake with your eyes closed trying to fall asleep," he says.
Researchers also tested participants' urine for markers of the hormone melatonin, which is produced in the evening and is associated with individual sleeping and waking rhythms.
Humpback whales have structured songs, with phrases and themes. But no-one knows what they mean
Lead researcher Ryuji Suzuki says that both humans and whales communicate by using discrete sound units that are arranged within a hierarchical structure. 
Put together, all of these elements indicate that whales have something akin to their own syntax, which normally refers to the grammatical arrangement of words within sentences. 
They then analysed the average amount of information that was conveyed for each symbol with a technique called information theory, which quantifies complexity and structure. 
"I do agree with the new findings. I am currently using information theory to analyse humpback whale communication, and I have come to similar conclusions," Miksis-Olds says.
Combining alcohol with an energy drink makes you feel sober enough to drive even though you're over the limit, new research shows
People who combine energy drinks with alcohol can feel more sober than they truly are, a new study suggests. 
And there's a popular, though unproven, belief that mixing energy drinks with alcohol can counter some of the effects of drinking. 
The study included 26 young men who each took part in three separate experiments: one in which they drank vodka mixed with an energy drink, another in which they had vodka mixed with fruit juice, and a third where they drank only the energy drink. 
In general, the researchers found that the men reported fewer headache symptoms and less weakness with the energy drink-alcohol mixture compared with the standard mixed drink. They also thought their hand-eye coordination was sharper. 
Hooke was a keen observer of nature with a fascination for things mechanical but, because of ill health as a child, he was initially left largely to educate himself. 
There he studied astronomy, tried his hand at mechanical flight and rubbed shoulders with top scientists of the day.
In 1665 Hooke finally found fame with publication of his Micrographia containing pictures of objects he had studied through a microscope he had made himself, and a number of biological discoveries. 
But he fell out with Newton when he accused him of stealing from his original ideas when he produced his theory of light and colour in 1672, and Newton removed all reference to Hooke from his famed Principia.
Vassanelli says the team's next project is to work out how chips could communicate with genes and vice versa.
"Genes are where memory comes from and without them you have no memory or computation," he says.
Professor Ashley Craig, an Australian neuroscientist with the University of Technology, Sydney, says linking computer circuits with brain cells can kill neurones by interfering with the brain's fragile chemical and electrical balance.
And linking chips with genes may be an option.
Commenting on the European proposal, he says targeting genes instead would enable the chip to communicate with a network of cells.
Later today, we'll know it as the total eclipse of the Sun, when the Moon will be perfectly aligned with our star, and the lunar shadow will alight on the tip of eastern Brazil.
"Don't any of you be surprised in future if land beasts change places with dolphins and go to live in their salty pastures, and get to like the sounding waves of the sea more than the land, while the dolphins prefer the mountains." 
Intelligence may have more to do with how the brain develops during adolescence than its overall size, researchers say.
US scientists at the National Institutes of Health show that the brains of children with high IQs show a distinct pattern of development. 
Youngsters with average IQs have a thicker cortex to start with and peak earlier before gradual thinning begins. 
"That might be happening more efficiently in the most intelligent children," says Shaw. "People with very agile minds tend to have a very agile cortex."
Astronomers have found mid-sized moonlets embedded in Saturn's rings. But that doesn't fit with current models of how the rings formed
Minute moons just a hundred metres or so across orbit Saturn within its rings, astronomers report, a finding that questions how the planet's majestic ring system came into being.
The only big exceptions were a pair of kilometre-wide moons called Pan and Daphnis that lurk within the ring system. There seemed to be nothing in the intermediate size. 
A proposed plan requiring Australian universities to prove their impact on business and the community before they get government research funding has met with a mixed response.
"While impact is very important and research should always be done with some outcomes in mind, we shouldn't expect that every bit of research that's being done in our universities is able to predict the sorts of outcomes [it will have]," says Go8 executive director, Virginia Walsh.
He says he is concerned about how a university research consultancy with local government to solve waste management problems would be valued under the new system.
His group also wants funding for agricultural problems such as wheat rust disease, which is only of relevance to a small group of countries including Australia, to be valued equally in terms of impact with research of global significance.
Dr Jeffrey Stilwell in the background with PhD student Chris Consoli holding the theropod toe bone fossil they found on the Chatham Islands
The move, which was announced recently by the Australian Resuscitation Council, is now in line with international consensus and best evidence, say the experts.
"By tribopolymerisation, we mean the use of small molecules in a fluid, such as an oil, to reduce wear and damage of the sliding surfaces by forming thin polymer films, which offer protection," says US researcher Professor Michael Furey, from Virginia Tech, who developed the process with Czeslaw Kajdas and colleagues at the Radom Technical University in Poland. 
"It is a process of molecular design. We do not add any polymers to the system, nor do we coat surfaces with polymers. Instead, our monomers are designed to form thin polymer films directly on the rubbing surfaces continuously and only where needed," Furey says. 
The international team of scientists has been working on the project since 1981, but recent developments include a precise way of measuring what happens as the films form; the discovery of new classes of compounds, such as the engine lubricant; and agreements with three organisations who hope to further develop and market the technology. 
Furey says that 16 engines recently were treated with about 4.5 grams of the smart composition. 
"All passed the run-in tests successfully with no signs of damage," he says. "In a subsequent series of tests in a different factory location, 24 engines were pre-treated the same way. All 24 engines were in perfect condition after the run-in tests. The results were quite amazing." 
The catch is that the substitute low-sulfur fuels increase wear and tear on the fuel injector and fuel pump, according to the researchers, who say they have invented diesel fuel "lubricity additives" that work with low-sulfur fuels to reduce their damage on the engine. 
"It works well with metal surfaces, especially steel, because molecules stick onto it easily. The engine pretreatment application might very well be possible," Larsen-Basse says.
Dr Bruce Harper, a Queensland-based consultant who has a long association with the Bureau of Meteorology, says Cyclone Larry, which hit the northern town of Innisfail recently, was not as powerful as people think.
He says while the bureau predicted the cyclone would hit land as a category 5 cyclone, with winds of around 290 kilometres per hour, the closest weather stations showed it was a lot weaker.
Both these measurements fall within the definition of a category 4 cyclone.
While Harper acknowledges the bureau helped people prepare for a severe cyclone and is keen to emphasise the agency does the best with the technology and resources it has, he says a difference of 50 kilometres per hour could have a huge impact on damage.
But, he says, cyclone risk engineers like himself use the closest weather station measurements, along with the actual damage caused by cyclones, to make their own estimates of the strengths of cyclones once they hit land.
The finding also suggests the Sun somehow ended up with a different composition from the cloud of dust and gas that preceded it, Ireland says.
"We found that the oxygen ... did not agree with either a planetary composition or the oxygen-16 rich composition," Ireland says.
Humans infected with bird flu appear to have more of the virus in their throat and nose than people with standard human influenza strains, a conference is due to hear today.
Dr Menno de Jong, head of the virology department at the University of Oxford's clinical research unit at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Ho Chi Minh City, studied 17 patients with bird flu.
He found the virus is often associated with disseminated infection in blood and faeces, and with higher levels of viral replication in the nasopharynx compared with contemporary Vietnamese influenza cases.
High viral levels, disseminated infection and an intense inflammatory response also seem associated with poor outcomes, he is due to tell the Australasian Society for Infectious Diseases annual scientific meeting in Wellington, New Zealand today. 
Resistance implies suboptimal suppression of replication and strategies to minimise it include ensuring adequate levels of the drug in the body by increasing the dose or giving it intravenously, or combining it with other antiviral drugs, he says.
Cockroaches are silent creatures, save perhaps for the sound of them scurrying over a countertop. They must therefore communicate without vocalising. 
"Cockroaches use chemical and tactile communication with each other," says Dr Jos&eacute; Halloy, who co-authored the research in the current Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
For example, if 50 insects were placed in a dish with three shelters, each with a capacity for 40 bugs, 25 roaches huddled together in the first shelter, 25 gathered in the second shelter, and the third was left vacant. 
When the researchers altered this set-up so that it had three shelters with a capacity for more than 50 insects, all the cockroaches moved into the first "house". 
Rob Coles, principal scientist with Queensland's Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, based at the Northern Fisheries Centre, Cairns, led the Australian arm of the research.
"[They say] you can detect similarities of human writing systems and [the shapes are] topographical, so you can stretch them, and squeeze them and muck around with them but they've still got basically the same number of links and junctions," she says.
Atala's team worked with immature cells known as progenitor cells from the patients' bladders.
Atala works with stem cells, the body's master cells, but in this case, his team made use of progenitor cells, which are slightly further along the pathway from a 'blank slate' master cell. 
In a commentary, Dr Steve Chung, from the Advanced Urology Institute of Illinois, describes the work as a "milestone" that could especially help people  with cancer of the bladder, which is overwhelmingly caused by smoking. 
Beta endorphins provide natural pain relief and low levels are associated with depression.
"Part of laughter is a general arousal and what that will do is stimulate various hormonal and autonomic systems which go along with arousal," he says.
It may also provide clues about whether the Earth and Venus were once similar, and when and why they took such radically different paths, says Dr Frank Mills of the Australian National University, an expert in the chemistry of the Venusian atmosphere who has been working with scientists directly involved in the mission.
The model examines differences between using antivirals as treatment once a person has bird flu to reduce their chance of dying and of transmission, and using drugs as post-exposure prophylaxis for those who have come into contact with an infectious person.
"Research indicates that on average the typical person will have 20 close contacts with people over a few days, 85% being relatives, friends and work colleagues and 15% being others such as shopkeepers and the bus driver."
The researchers defined a close contact as someone who had a two-way conversation within a metre of an infected person.
Taubenberger and team also said their argument was supported by family trees constructed by comparing particular 1918 virus genes with equivalent genes from a broad range of viruses that have been found in other animals.
But Gibbs disagrees with Taubenberger's interpretation of his own virus family trees.
Taubenberger argues the 1918 virus came directly from birds without combining with viruses in other animals first.
"Wings have evolved in insects, birds, mammals and reptiles," he says. "But they haven't evolved from a common ancestor with wings. They've evolved wings independently.
This fishy creature, which was up to 3 metres long, walked on land with fins that have arm-like bones
They also faced the threat of polar bears during their search for so-called elpistostegid fish, which are thought to be most closely related to tetrapods, land animals with limbs such as amphibians, reptiles, birds and humans. 
"Previous fossils representing this evolutionary event have really been fish with a few land characteristics, or land vertebrates with a few residual fish characteristics," says Dr Andrew Milner, of the Natural History Museum in London.
An investigation into a UK drug trial that left six men seriously ill has found no evidence to suggest there was anything wrong with the drug or the way the tests were run, a regulatory body says.
As a consequence, the agency will not authorise any trials for similar drugs without taking external, expert advice. 
Of the six, five have left hospital and one is making a good recovery. In the days after the trial, two of the men were described as critically ill with organ failure. 
At the time, Parexel said it had operated within regulatory guidelines and TeGenero said the response did not reflect the results obtained from initial laboratory studies.
"This is a complex scientific issue which raises important scientific and medical questions about the potential risks associated with this type of drug and how to make the transition from pre-clinical testing to trials in humans," the report says. 
Japanese researchers have made a liquid form of silicon they say might one day be sprayed onto chips with an inkjet printer.
The mixture is then diluted with a solvent like toluene, and is so fluid that it can be coated onto a surface by spinning, or even sprayed by an inkjet printer. 
It's possible to create order by introducing disorder, say researchers who have been working with computer models of swinging pendulums
"It's not really counterintuitive because one's intuition doesn't really work for such systems because they're complicated," he says. "Our intuition is good for dealing with simple things rather than complicated things."
Wolfe also says the research only has limited applications because the researchers used calculations with specific numbers rather than solving equations made up of symbols such as x and y.
Wolfe says ideally the findings would inspire someone to come up with a general theory to understand what was going on, but he says it is very hard to find mathematical solutions to complicated nonlinear systems.
"The fact that they have been found within a few million years of the dinosaurs' extinction is compelling evidence that modern birds must have evolved earlier and diversified during the time of the dinosaurs," he says.
"It also suggests that many of those bird lineages survived the catastrophe that wiped out the dinosaurs, so it's unlikely that there was a big turnover, with modern birds only emerging after the mass extinction."  
The researchers used DNA from these birds to provide a broad framework of family relationships which, together with the fossil evidence, is used to predict when those birds must have arisen.
"We estimate that ant diversification took off approximately 100 million years ago, along with the rise of flowering plants, the angiosperms," says team leader Professor Naomi Pierce.
"These plants provided ants with new habitats both in the forest canopy and in the more complex leaf litter on the forest floor, and the herbivorous insects that evolved alongside flowering plants provided food for ants." 
"The outer ring of Saturn is blue and has Enceladus right smack at its brightest spot, and Uranus is strikingly similar, with its blue ring right on top of Mab's orbit," says Imke de Pater, a professor of astronomy at the University of California Berkeley, who helped lead the study. 
Mab is probably covered with water ice, like the other moons of Uranus, but that has nothing to do with the ring's colour, says de Pater. 
"The interesting thing with Uranus is that in 2007 the rings will appear edge-on," she says. "In 2007 the rings will be 100 times brighter." 
In the study, researchers asked 84 students to join one of two groups to play a game with tokens. One group of players punished members who did not share freely, while the other group did not. 
"Each player is endowed with 20 money [tokens] and may contribute between 0 and 20 [tokens] to a public good," the researchers write.
Dr Bernd Irlenbusch of the London School of Economics adds he was surprised with the extent of punishment.
They found that when females are not around, the males develop into sexually mature adults slowly, growing into relatively large adults with lots of energy stores.
Kasumovic and Andrade say growing up fast gives the spiders the best chance of being first to mate with the nearby females, something that is important considering the sex life of redbacks.
The researchers suspect that this extra fat gives the males the endurance to compete with other males for the extended courtship rituals that females prefer.
In the violent game, players took the role of a criminal, and were instructed by the mafia to beat up a drug dealer with a baseball bat. 
She says this suggests that violent video games make players more likely to throw caution to the wind, whether it's with regard to their own health or any other type of risky behaviour.
But regardless of whether they grew up in a violent environment, the young men who had played the violent game were less cooperative and more competitive in completing an assigned task with another person, compared to those who played the non-violent game.
Untreated sewage from toilets, bathtubs, sinks and rainwater from the streets flows into the system at 9.6&deg;C and comes out at 5.7&deg;C after heat is extracted with a refrigerant. 
The only problem with the system is that flow in the sewers tends to be irregular.
But the man who worked with Allon to market his research says the system will make searching the net faster and easier.
"When you put in a query it comes up with a list of associated keywords that specify your search to a greater depth," says Andrew Stead, business development manager of the NewSouth Innovations, the commercial arm of the University of New South Wales.
For example, a search for a particular model of luxury car comes up with where to buy one, a review of the car itself and an overview of the car manufacturer.
Dr Peter Bailey is project leader of the CSIRO's information retrieval project and has been involved in designing a search engine designed for use within organisations.
Graffiti is the modern equivalent of cave art, an expert says. Both are produced by young men with adrenaline and sex on their minds
"Today, boys draw the testosterone subjects of a hot automobile, fighter jet, Jedi armour, sports, direct missile hit, etc - all of the things they associate with the adrenaline of success," says Professor R Dale Guthrie, author of The Nature of Paleolithic Art. 
He says that many of the cave art images of animals are rather graphic, showing, for example, speared animals with blood pouring out of their mouths and noses. 
Guthrie has also noticed that males were drawn with no defined sexual parts save for a simple line designating the penis. Few men were even represented, but the images of women in caves tell a different story. 
Guthrie analysed the handprints and then compared the results with earlier research on male and female hands.
Paul Martin, professor of quaternary biogeography at the University of Arizona, says he is inclined to agree with the new theory and findings.
"In addition, he brings detailed knowledge of late Pleistocene fossils to his study of cave art. Finally, like many zoologists, especially those with children of their own, he is an astute observer of human behaviour.
Labradors and dachshunds appear to waddle, while greyhounds seem to march by with a fast clip.
"Almost all robots require a large amount of power - much higher than an animal would use - partly because they tend to use bent legs. I show what would happen with stiff legs," Usherwood adds.
Inspired by stiff-legged mechanical toys that can walk down hills, Usherwood and his team designed several different computer models for dog walking. The researchers then compared these models with observations of actual dogs on a treadmill. 
Walking for both bipeds and quadrupeds is like controlled falling because, with each step, the individual leans forward and is 'caught' by an outstretched limb.
This is true for bipeds such as humans. But he says people put more energy into extending their legs, while dogs appear to power themselves with torque around their hips, similar to how weight is distributed on a bicycle. 
Dogs, particularly older, arthritic ones, often suffer hip problems because if any two bones within the hip region lose their normal position, the abnormal areas can grind against each other with each step. 
Russell Main, a Concord Field Station researcher, believes that dog legs work like two inverted pendulums, where mechanical energy is usually recovered with each stride. 
Consumers are being marketed drugs for premature ejaculation without good evidence there is a medical problem to be treated, an Australian conference heard this week.
She says although there are no drugs yet specifically approved to treat premature ejaculation, doctors are treating the condition with available drugs that are known to slow down the speed of ejaculation.
For example, he says, a study in 1948 by Alfred Kinsey discovered three-quarters of men ejaculated within two minutes of coitus and regarded this as acceptable.
He says this coincided with a belief that women's lack of sexual satisfaction during intercourse could be addressed if her male partner could take longer to ejaculate.
"I think it's part of a transformation of sex from a subjective experience into a concrete performance, almost like a sport with rules and goals and achievement standards," says Tiefer. 
Over the course of other experiments, Brun realised the holding power of the tiny critters, which attach themselves to surfaces with a stalk-like appendage.
The researchers found that a single bacterium could withstand a stress of 0.11 to 2.26 micronewtons.
In other words, the amount of bacteria that fit onto an Australian 20 cent piece (or a US quarter) could withstand being pulled by a force of four to five tonnes, about the mass of an adult elephant.
Along with the hominid fossils, the scientists discovered hundreds of remains of pigs, birds, rodents and monkeys as well as hyenas and big cats which gave them an idea of the habitat in which they existed. 
According to research presented recently at Italy's Uffizi Gallery in Florence, the Mona Lisa consists of countless of dot layers applied with a technique of microdivided brushstrokes. 
"Light and shade should blend without lines or borders, in the manner of smoke," he wrote.
He started with a poplar panel, similar to the one Leonardo used to paint the Mona Lisa in 1503-1506. 
Franck treated the panel with gypsum and animal glue, then painted an eye with a brush, but using black chalk.
Then he applied a semi-opaque, diluted oil-based wash to soften the chalk lines and then retouched the details with microscopic brushstrokes.
Franck argues that it is scientifically impossible to distinguish the dots with a magnifying glass. 
"Light penetrates each dot, producing reflection, diffraction, and diffusion. Thus, when you look at the painting, the surface appears homogeneous. No dot can be seen. Moreover, in my works the dots completely disappeared within three years. The same might have happened with the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
"It is compatible with the material evidence of the Mona Lisa as analysed by the Louvre's laboratory," they write in the exhibition catalogue.
Venus' south pole, by day and night. The left hand image is the view by day, showing sunlight reflected from the tops of clouds. The right hand image, taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral cloud, with the darker regions corresponding to thicker cloud cover
The probe is equipped with seven instruments, many of which are spares from Europe's ongoing Mars Express mission and the Rosetta comet probe. 
On 26 April 1986, at 1.23 am local time, a series of explosions ripped through reactor four at the plant in the north of what is today Ukraine, near its border with Belarus.
Environmental groups like Greenpeace reject the findings as "whitewash", collusion "with the nuclear lobby" and "insulting for the victims". They estimate that the death toll will be in the tens of thousands. 
In addition to health effects like thyroid cancer, survivors also deal with psychological problems. 
Osmanagic, who wears an Indiana Jones-like hat and clothing and says he sharpened his eye for archaeology on numerous trips around the world, says the two structures are precisely aligned with the four points of the compass. 
On the outskirts of the town, Visocica Hill, which Osmanagic refers to as the Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun, stands some 220 metres high, with a square base of more than 400 by 400 metres. 
Local souvenir shops selling oriental style coffee pots and plates now offer slippers, ceramic coin-boxes, t-shirts and brandy with pyramid logos.
They can interfere with a sheep's wool and meat growth, and make the animal weak and susceptible to other diseases. They can even kill.
It seems they can, with Seb the female German shepherd being trained to detect parasite-infected sheep droppings by its odour with 80-90% accuracy.
They are confident they will have a prototype within five years.
In general, these squid tend to be solitary, unromantic animals with a propensity to cannibalise their neighbours and take sexual favours by force, he says.
This is probably to compensate for the loss of their protective shells during evolution, he says, with more brain capacity needed to protect their vulnerable bodies from predators.
He says mating in the squid world is forceful on the part of the male but females play a role in choosing to associate with prospective mates or in attempting to rebuff unwanted advances.
Of the 55 study participants who've had a near-death experience, 60% have also experienced REM intrusion at some point in their lives. That compares with 24% of 55 adults in a comparison group. 
Comparisons with similar species
Kilgour compared grooming behaviour of beef cattle with undomesticated, but related, species including bison, water buffalo, banteng and eland.
"We are dreaming of something like a baseball cap with electrodes in the cap that can measure the brainwaves," says one of the scientists behind the project Professor Klaus-Robert M&uuml;ller of the Fraunhofer Institute. 
That vision, says M&uuml;ller, will require advances in electrode technology that allow the tiny, metal sensors to pick up electric signals from brainwave activity without making contact with the skin. 
For now, M&uuml;ller and his colleagues are still somewhat constrained by the conventional electrode cap, which looks like a swimmer's cap embedded with 64 or 128 contact points and a web of wires leading to a computer. 
Each electrode embedded in the cap must be smeared with a conductive gel before the cap is fitted properly to a person's head, a process that can take 30 minutes to an hour. 
Whereas other research projects may require a person to spend 100 hours practising with the machine before calibration is finalised, the Fraunhofer system takes only 5 minutes. 
During calibration with the Berlin group's technology, the person imagines moving his left or right hand.
Once the person is in sync with the computer, he can imagine moving his hands or feet or rotating an object to trigger an action on the screen. 
The work could open the door on a wealth of information about how the brain functions, not to mention improve how it controls images on-screen with just a thought, the researchers say.
Researchers examined samples from 585 people with gastroenteritis due to the nation's most common bacterial cause of foodborne disease, Campylobacter jejuni.
Those tested were from Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, Tasmania and Western Australia, states that require reporting of patients infected with the bacteria, and were hospitalised with gastroenteritis or remained in the community.
Reasons could include contact with an infected person or eating meat from an animal with the resistant bacteria, Patel says.
In Australia causes could include medical treatment with the antibiotics, eating imported contaminated food or acquiring resistance in hospital.
Dr Michael Ryan, curator and head of vertebrate palaeontology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, examined the dinosaur bones on a recent trip to Patagonia. He agrees with the other palaeontologists. 
The Australian National University has become equal partners with eight US institutions to design the US$500 million (A$671 million) optical and infrared Giant Magellan Telescope.
The new telescope is to be built in Chile and will consist of six mirrors surrounding a central mirror, with each mirror 8.4 metres across.
Sackett says the light-gathering power increases with the square of the diameter of a telescope.
Powerful ripples that rend the fabric of space as black holes collide have been simulated for the first time by a supercomputer, finally giving astronomers something specific to watch for with new gravity wave telescopes. 
These waves propagate through the universe and researchers say the waves ought to be detectable with the right equipment.
They've come up with a basic gravity wave signature of a black hole merging process from start to finish. 
LIGO, with its 4 kilometre-wide antenna, ought to be able to detect gravity waves from the collisions of smaller black holes, says Saulson. 
Scientists had plans to drill through the ice to take samples from the lakes but were worried about contaminating them with new microbes. 
And the Antarctic outflow is "miniscule" compared with the megafloods of the last Ice Age.
Professor David Healy of Cardiff University told the Inaugural Conference on Disease-Mongering recently in Newcastle, Australia, that increasing numbers of children are being treated for the condition with drugs that carry serious side-effects, without evidence the condition exists in that age group.
He says children as young as two who are "tricky to handle, overactive or difficult in some way" are being diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
Healy believes that the diagnosis of children with bipolar disorder is part of a general trend towards increasing the number of people treated with mood stabilisers, which he says have risks that are downplayed and benefits that are overplayed.
He says while a very small percentage of people have the serious form of bipolar disorder that might warrant medication, recently people with relatively mild mood swings have been treated, and this is now including children.
Chairperson of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists' Faculty of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Dr Phill Brock, is also concerned about children being inappropriately diagnosed with bipolar.
He says he is aware of advocates for diagnosing bipolar in children and found it alarming when a US organisation approached the faculty he represents 18 months ago to set up a support group for infants and children with bipolar disorder.
More than half of the authors of the DSM, the manual used to diagnose mental health problems, have had ties with the pharmaceutical industry. But not everyone agrees this is a bad thing
Dr Darrel Regier, director of the American Psychiatric Association's research division, says the study is "an attempt to develop probably some guilt by association with the pharmaceutical industry". 
If none of the experts were involved with the industry, "that would mean they were really out of step with the major advances in the treatment of mental illness", he says. 
Infrared cameras used the reflected light to generate 3D images that focused on horse back vertebrae, joints and limbs as the animals walked with and without loads.
She found that while all weight caused a horse to adjust its back position, the saddle with a rider led to the greatest adjustment. 
"During walk, trot and canter, the position of the [horse's] back is more extended in the situation with a saddle and weight," de Cocq says.
The back extension, according to de Cocq, is consistent with probable causes for the condition of 'kissing spines', when loads and repeated undulations push parts of the horse's back close together. 
This usually happens between the withers and the loin, or in the region that involves the 10th -18th vertebrae. In advanced cases, sometimes parts of the spine grow together.
Horses with longer backs are more likely to suffer from back problems associated with riding, probably because of uneven weight distribution, de Cocq says.
For horse riders, de Cocq offered this advice: "Riders should pay attention to the signals a horse can give. For example, 'cold back' [when a horse stiffens its back or negatively reacts after bearing weight], problems with saddling, girthing and mounting the horse may be an indication that there are problems with the saddle or the riding technique."
But Stough says this memory finding should be interpreted with caution because the underlying biological mechanism is not known.
"Further investigations such as functional magnetic resonance imaging are needed to confirm the neuropsychological changes associated with mobile phone emissions," he says.
Pysklywec studied the Southern Alps of New Zealand, which have been forming with the collision of the Pacific and Australian plates, a process that began 5 million years ago.
Three CSIRO scientists were last night presented with an ATSE Clunies Ross Award for their work on Bt cotton.
They were among researchers in the fields of environmental science, metallurgy, information technology and physics to be presented with an award, in recognition of their "outstanding achievements in the application of science and technology for the social and economic benefit of Australia".
"It used to cost A$200 million annually to spray cotton crops with pesticide to control the moth but now they only use about 10% of the insecticide they used to use," says Constable, the team leader.
"The main issue was insecticide could contaminate land, air and water so this is safer for the environment and everyone as it only kills the moth, without harming other helpful insects, creatures or humans."
They correlated the animals' choices with the activity of neurones in the OFC with the valued assigned to the different types of juices. 
Earlier research involving the OFC showed that lesions in the area seem to have an association with eating disorders, compulsive gambling and unusual social behaviour. 
The Ladybag, aimed at young professional women, could put an end to leaving the house without the mobile phone, house keys or wallet.
"We are a group of six women on the team. We came up with the bag idea because we thought that all of us would use it," says team member Ginny Mesina, a student from Canada's Simon Fraser University. 
Each pattern is an icon representing an essential item that the owner does not want to leave home without. In the prototype, these items are a set of keys, a wallet, and a mobile phone. 
That Ladybag is equipped with a light-emitting diode screen that contains seven different expressive face patterns. 
For example, if the person fiddles frantically with the bag, the face with a worried look will light up. If the owner hugs the bag, a happy face emoticon will light up. 
According to Mesina, the team has had a wave of unexpected attention and will be talking with the university's technology transfer department about patenting the Ladybag.
Australian Associate Professor of physics Rod Cross of the University of Sydney has written a book on the science of tennis with Brody.
To come up with their fuel-efficiency estimate, Allen and his colleagues used NASA's orbiting Chandra X-Ray Observatory to peer into the inner regions of nine giant elliptical galaxies.
She says while the centre doesn't usually deal directly with activists, aspiring inventors often put an environmental spin their product as a "selling point".
Lysaght says no one single group can be credited with driving change and a move to more sustainable industries is a response to a network of social and economic factors.
"When considering the current scientific standing with respect to Sun signs, it becomes clear that there is little or no truth in [them]," says Dr Peter Hartmann, who led the study in the May issue of the journal Personality and Individual Differences.
"This does not necessarily mean that all astrology is without truth, but only that the independent effect of Sun signs is most likely to be irrelevant," says Hartmann, a researcher in the Department of Psychology at Denmark's University of Aarhus.
"Assuming that you could buy a pill that would increase your IQ with one point, but it would cost you $10,000, would you do it? Probably not, but if you could buy a pill that would increase your IQ by 15 points that would be something else, simply because you get more value for your money," he says. 
Geoffrey Dean, a former astrologist based in Australia who researches the possible scientific validity of astrology, tracked over 2000 people who were born within minutes of each other. 
There's no motivation to put up Arabic content on the web as there's no dedicated search engine to find it, commentators say. But that may be about to change with the launch of a new search engine later this year
Sawafi, working with Saudi partner Integrated Technical Solutions, is hoping to copy the success of local Chinese language search engine Baidu, which has made huge strides in a market with over 100 million users.
Saudi Arabia, with an affluent population of 24 million, and Dubai in the United Arab Emirates would be key places for winning online advertising to fuel Arabic search engines. 
Beans cooked with a pinch of bacteria means diners can tuck in without the explosive results, scientists say.
When the researchers fermented black beans with the two bacteria, they found it decreased the soluble fibre content by more than 60% and lowered levels of raffinose, a compound known to cause gas, by 88%. 
For instance, Lin says we need a fair process for commercialising or claiming property in space to avoid what he calls the kind of "chaotic land-grab" that occurred with internet domain names.
"We would not rush to develop the south pole without a well-thought plan, so the same reasonable precaution would seem to apply to colonising space," he says.
"We have already littered our outer atmosphere with floating space debris that rockets and satellites need to track and navigate around, not to mention abandoned equipment on the Moon and other planets," he says.
"In a sense, space is unlimited," he says. "There's a lot of real estate out there and no possibility I think within a thousand years of any sort of territorial conflict."
This is a departure from an earlier theory that holds that the massive planets' tilts, or obliquities, were caused by collisions with Earth-sized space rocks during the early period of the solar system. 
The three main male contraceptive methods - the condom, withdrawal and vasectomy - are regarded by many as insufficiently reliable or difficult to reverse. 
The study compared plants included conifers, kauri pine, grevilleas and wattle from tropical areas of Australia, Papua New Guinea and the Amazon with their counterparts in temperate zones in countries including New Zealand, the US and Australia's island state of Tasmania.
The Friends of the Earth (FOE) says the government taskforce charged with developing a national nanotechnology plan is treating public input as a "tokenistic add-on" rather than something that should help shape Australia's response to the technology.
Miller says unions, environmental, public health, farming, disability rights, consumer and civil liberties groups should be involved in developing the strategy. But she says the taskforce has had only "ad hoc" contact with groups other than those from science and industry.
The National Nanotechnology Strategy Taskforce, the body within the federal industry department charged with developing Australia's nanotechnology plan, issued a discussion paper for public comment.  
Miller also says the paper should have mentioned efforts by researchers to enhance humans, by combining nanotechnology with biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science.
A spokesperson for industry minister Ian Macfarlane says the taskforce is undertaking "extensive consultation" with industry, science and community groups to develop the strategy.
"It is likely that options for a national nanotechnology strategy will place priority on the need for ongoing effective public engagement, awareness and debate - much in the same way as has been done with biotechnology."
And it agrees with GM researchers and industry that GM and non-GM crops can co-exist.
The review also disagrees with some farming and consumer groups, that people releasing GM organisms (GMOs) be made strictly liable for any detrimental effects of their products.
But the time limit for assessing field trials would be reduced and industry and researchers conducting low risk work with GMOs would have less requirement to report their activities, Timbs says.
The review also recommends the Gene Technology Technical Advisory Committee (GTTAC), which advises the OGTR on risks, should include people with specific expertise in public health and environmental risk assessment.
You're more open to suggestion with a cup of coffee in your hand, research shows
But caffeine also puts people in a better mood, which makes them more likely to agree with a message, the researchers say.
"If I have the magical technique to take you out to dinner it might work, but it doesn't mean I can get you to go out with me."
Office workers who use a simple forearm support might avoid the pain that can come with long days at the computer, new research suggests.
They were also less likely to be diagnosed with a musculoskeletal injury in the neck or shoulders, according to findings published in the latest issue of the journal Occupational and Environmental Medicine. 
Over the next year, Rempel's team found workers who used a forearm support were half as likely as those who received only ergonomics training to be diagnosed with a neck or shoulder injury.
Children with imaginary friends have more vivid daydreams than other children, a new study shows for the first time.
Australian researcher Dr Paula Bouldin of Deakin University shows that children with imaginary friends also tend to have more "mythical content" in their dreams.
It may appear obvious that children with imaginary friends have a richer fantasy life than those without, but to date there has been little specific research into the area.
She questioned 74 children aged between three and eight, half with a current or past imaginary friend.
The group with imaginary friends reported more mythical content in their dreams, had more frequent and more vivid daydreams and were more likely to play games with a mythical content.
Newman says while imaginary friends are quite common in younger ages, they are more likely to be associated with emotional or family problems in children over the age of about seven.
Adults with imaginary friends
Most children grow out of imaginary friends, Newman says. But in some cases an imaginary friend can emerge in adulthood, usually in response to trauma, inability to cope with stress and sometimes psychotic illness.
Bouldin says her study suggests children with imaginary friends can readily access fantasy themes and may develop sophisticated information processing skills.
But she says it could also be that children with imaginary friends are simply more willing to discuss their fantasies than those without.
Belcher and her team are working next to produce the negatively charged cathode with the viruses and believe they will have a working prototype in about two years.
Polar bears and hippos have joined the ranks of species threatened with extinction from climate change, unregulated hunting and other human-made dangers, says a leading environmental agency. 
More than half of the Mediterranean's 25 endemic species of freshwater fish are deemed to be at risk of extinction, along with one in four of East Africa's freshwater fish. 
Researchers have thought they were in some way associated with sprites, the enigmatic vertical bolts of lighting that zap upward from very high cloud tops towards space.
But new US research with an array of ground-based and space-borne instruments has located the gamma-ray sources much deeper in the Earth's atmosphere, in thunderstorms. 
"Sprites were the logical choice [for a link with gamma-ray flashes]," says lead author Dr Mark Stanley of the Los Alamos National Laboratory. 
Stanley and his colleagues have found terrestrial gamma-ray flashes that appear to come from less than 15,000 metres up, within the range of jet aircraft.
He knows they are both the same species because he's mated left and right-handed males with females and they've produced offspring that have survived. DNA studies also show they are the same species.
Dimorphism is quite common, for example, males and females of the same species. But it is extremely rare within a particular sex, says Holwell.
The females are perfectly symmetrical, says Holwell, which means asymmetrical males must twist their abdomen to mate with the females. 
Portraying coma patients in movies as 'sleeping beauties' misrepresents reality and could skew the way we think and deal with coma in real life, researchers report.
They say showing people suddenly awakening after years in a coma with no physical or mental problems, or depicting long-term comatose patients peacefully 'sleeping' with perfect grooming and a healthy tan, minus any feeding tubes or loss of muscle tone, is unrealistic.
The concern is that these images become 'real' for everyday people and may well influence the decisions they would make if faced with a similar situation, researchers report in the journal Neurology.
Wijdicks and colleague then showed clips of scenes from some of the movies to 72 people with no medical training.
For example, 31% shown a comedy scene where a comatose person tapped out a message with his finger in morse code believe it could happen in real life. 
Australian consultant neurologist Associate Professor Richard Burns, who is based at Flinders University and Repatriation General Hospital in Adelaide, says he takes movie scenes of comatose patients with a pinch of salt.
But the acidity of onions or tomatoes does not change with the cooking method.
Ratatouille was acidic no matter how it was cooked, but oven-roasting significantly increased the acidity of the dish, compared with stewing. 
Known as the Walker circulation, this system of currents functions as a huge belt stretching across the tropical Pacific, with dry air moving eastward at high altitude from Asia to South America and moist air flowing westward along the ocean's surface, pushing the prevailing trade winds. 
The observed slowdown has been more pronounced in the past 50 years, Vecchi says, noting this fits with what theorists and computer models predict should happen as a result of human-induced global warming. 
It is not consistent with any natural fluctuation in the system, Vecchi says. 
Two years ago all Chinese web portals were required to register with the government, while they also signed on to government issued regulations to self-police their sites for "unhealthy content".
People could soon generate their own wind energy with a new type of domestic windmill that plugs straight into the grid.
Ferraretto says that over a year, with an annual average wind speed of 6 metres per second, the generator would produce around A$2000 worth of electricity.
"People with beautiful homes wouldn't want one of these on their roof," says Ferraretto.
"The pharaoh's sex organ is clearly visible in Burton's pictures. All was normal in King Tut. The penis is a highly vascularised organ and shrinks when it is mummified. Actually, King Tut has been flattered by the embalmers' work. There is no comparison with &Ouml;tzi's penis," says Egarter. 
&Ouml;tzi's natural mummification and dehydration in an Alpine glacier produced a "collapse of the genitalia", which left the Iceman with an almost invisible member. 
Among 120 types of fish caught, the scientists found what may be a new type of black dragonfish, with fang-like teeth, growing up to about 40 centimetres, and a 20-centimetre-long great swallower, with wide jaws and a light-producing organ to attract prey. 
The researchers found that most of the music increased blood pressure and heart rate, with a stronger effect seen with faster music.
Relaxing with music
The musicians also had more pronounced shifts in heart rate and breathing when they heard the music, which the researcher says is probably associated with their ability to synchronise their breathing with the music phrase.
British defence authorities have come up with an explanation for UFOs that is bound to disappoint those who are convinced they've seen a flying saucer.
"When a suspect is caught with images on the computer and the suspect has a digital camera in possession, the standard defence is that the images are computer-generated or downloaded from the internet," says Dr Jessica Fridrich, an associate professor of electrical and computer engineering at the State University of New York in Binghamton.
To isolate the 'pattern noise' created by an individual camera, Fridrich and her team took 320 images with each of nine different cameras.
By assigning values to the variations found between pixels, the pattern noise, they came up with a numerical fingerprint unique to each camera.
Once they had the numerical fingerprint, they used the mathematical process of correlation to compare the numerical fingerprints to the pattern noise from thousands of other images taken with the cameras.
When using this method in a real-life situation, forensic scientists would take a bunch of digital images with the camera in question to come up with a numerical fingerprint.
Next, they would isolate the digital fingerprint extracted from the illegal images and correlate that number with the one from the camera.
In laboratory experiments, Fridrich and her team matched several thousand different images to the correct camera without a single misclassification, even when images were compressed or resized.
For now, Fridrich's technique works with digital still images, but she is hoping to soon move to scanners and digital video.
While many air-breathing aquatic insects dive with air bubbles, it appears the backswimmers use haemoglobin to help keep them stationary below the surface while waiting for prey.
They found that the insect uses a strategy much like a diver with a buoyancy vest to control the depth at which he or she hovers in the water.
Backswimmers breath in a bubble of oxygen they take with them on their dive. 
PhD student David Brennan from the University of Western Sydney has shown that people with musical training appear to have different memory pathways compared to others.
Brennan found both musicians and non-musicians could identify the original theme when it was compared with a version where just the pitch or tempo was changed.
"This probably represents the fact that ... as you allocate more time and training to dealing with the fine details of information you tend to store it in more separate categories.
"Conversely, it suggests that for the many things we have to deal with that aren't focal points, we have a very elegantly efficient way of joining them into one single relationship construct."
For example, a dolphin might be expected to recognise its name if called by its mother. But the new study found most dolphins recognise names, their signature whistles, even when emitted without inflection or other vocal cues. 
To find out, they studied bottlenose dolphins in Sarasota Bay, Florida. Instead of playing recordings of actual dolphins making signature whistles, the researchers synthesised signature whistles with the caller's voice features removed and played them to dolphins through an underwater speaker. 
Bored with khaki? Scientits say new fibres could one-day be used to make camouflage clothing change colour
What Sotzing has done, says Williams, is create a conductive polymer with the versatile properties of a regular polymer.
Threads with different charges could be woven together with thin metal wires designed to deliver various voltages, with the intersection between a thread and a wire serving as a pixel.
Changing the voltage with an embedded battery would result in different colours.
A fabric woven with the polymer fibres could be used, for example, in t-shirts bearing video advertisements or jackets that double as computers. The material could also be used by soldiers to blend into both forested and urban environments.
Some of them dreaded each shock so much that they repeatedly opted to have a higher-voltage jolt just so they could get it over with more quickly.
In a second go, participants were presented with choices on how each shock should be delivered, with the voltage and timing of the jolt as the variables.
Activity was specifically high in areas related to attention, but not in those associated with fear and anxiety.
"It's certainly not bad for you, but the claims that are made are perhaps a lot of hype without any real evidence," says Viola Korczak, health policy officer at the Australian Consumers' Association.
Other studies report that the green pigment chlorophyll, which makes up 70% of wheatgrass juice, shares molecular similarities with haemoglobin. But this doesn't mean it enhances red blood cell production.
A study of 16 patients with the blood disorder beta thalassaemia found wheatgrass juice reduced transfusions in half but not the other half.
He says it's a minimally processed wholefood with high levels of phytochemicals, which play a role in growth signalling in plants and are associated with reduced blood pressure, reduced cholesterol and cancer prevention in humans.
Don't bother with months of email courtship, pay only polite attention to the advice of your friends. And as for those Jane Austen-style books on how to select Mr Right, leave them to gather dust on the shop shelves. 
They recruited 39 male students aged 18 to 33, who were photographed, with their faces framed in an oval to obscure information about hairstyles, and with a neutral facial expression. 
The man with the child in this eyes
Models with a wingspan of 5 metres, capable of carrying up to 50 kilograms, remain undetectable by radar.
And thanks to satellite positioning systems, they can now be programmed to hit targets some distance away within a few metres of their target.
Security services the world over have been considering the problem for several years, but no one has yet come up with a solution. 
In his view, "if terrorists get hold of that, it will be impossible to do anything about it. We did some tests with a friend who works at a military radar base: they never detected us ... If the radar picks anything up, it thinks it is a flock of birds and automatically wipes it." 
"To many people UAVs [unmanned aerial vehicles] may seem too exotic, demanding substantial efforts and cost compared with the methods terrorists frequently use," he says.
&bull; A$98.3 million over four years to deal with illegal foreign fishing
&bull; A$1.5 million per year funding increase for Australian scientists collaborating on research projects with China.
Scientists have put forward various theories to explain the disappearance of the mammoth and the wild horse, Equus ferus, which coincided with the arrival of humans from central Asia in North America more than 12,000 years ago.
His radiocarbon research shows there was a 1000-year difference between the demise of the wild horse and the woolly mammoth which Guthrie says is inconsistent with other theories.
Dr Craig Agnor, with the University of California at Santa Cruz, was sitting in a lecture about binary Kuiper Belt objects when he had the idea that Neptune may have kidnapped its main moon Triton from such a pair. 
Most scientists explain the moon's odd orbit and inclination by some variation of a capture scenario, a collision between objects, for example. But Agnor had long been troubled by details that did not fit with any of the interpretations. 
As well as deliberately lit fires, there are a small number of human-caused fires that are lit without motive. These include fires due to accidents, people with mental disabilities who lack control over their actions and fires lit by children. 
They say the vast majority of the 30,000 to 40,000 fires that occur across Australia each year are caused by humans, with somewhere around 50% of these being deliberately lit.
He then adapted the findings to the bush and came up with a motive-based classification system for people who deliberately light bushfires.
"Finding a new genus of the best-studied group of living mammals is a sobering reminder of how much we have to learn about our planet's biodiversity," adds Assistant Professor Link Olson of the University of Alaska Museum, who worked with Stanley and others on the report. 
"Had we gotten these surprising results based on a single gene, we'd have been pretty skeptical, but each of the genes we analysed either firmly supported the grouping of kipunji with baboons or failed to support a close relationship between kipunji and other mangabeys," Olson says.
An adult kipunji is about 90 centimetres tall with a long tail, long greyish-brown fur, a black face, hands and feet. 
Drawing the most scrutiny are cases involving RU486, a drug that is taken with another called misoprostol early in pregnancy to trigger an abortion.
"We hadn't seen that with this comet," says astronomer Michael Kelley, a doctoral student at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, and member of the team that made the Spitzer telescope observations.
"It's been suspected because it's associated with a meteor shower." 
Yesterday, for instance, some brand new visible light images of the comet from 3 May were released by astronomers who caught the disintegration drama with the 8.2-metre Subaru Telescope in Hawaii. 
Big telescopes will continue to take turns looking at the comet when there is time and until the comet is too close to the Sun for the telescopes to look without damaging their instruments.
Juggling a career with family life may help to keep women healthy, a new study shows.
McMunn says it has been known for some time that women who combine employment with motherhood and partnership have better health.
"I was looking for the answer to my questions of why do farmers keep all these abandoned vehicles and machinery on their property, why do they keep them for so long, and what do they do with them?" Smith says.
Analysts say the case shows there are many pitfalls as the government strives to encourage its top schools and industries to come up with their own technological inventions to help the country catch up with the West. 
"The salary now is based on how many papers you issue, what new inventions you come up with." 
An unnamed internet commentator says online that the root of the problem is China is too anxious to catch up with technologically advanced countries. 
"The role of the education system, r&d system and government funding ... all of this is being examined and looked at with fresh eyes in light of the high level of focus on creating an innovation society ... That's good for domestic industry and foreign industry." 
But Damien O'Brien of the Queensland University of Technology law school, says the revised laws profess, but essentially fail, to keep track with developing technologies and emerging markets.
For example a website could combine music from one source with images from another source and a search function from somewhere else.
Mashups are common in music videos and websites. For example, pop star Kylie Minogue has used legal mashups in her music videos while the website ChicagoCrime mixes police data with Google maps.
"If you're trying to do innovation in a digital realm it can be very hard because you're using reproductions all the time ... so the idea with a creative common licence is to try to get material out into the common realm as long as it isn't used for commercial purposes."
"Our results suggest that future planning is not a uniquely human ability, contradicting the notion that it emerged in hominids only within the past 2.5 to 1.6 million years," they write.
Researchers with the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project say they believe the ships, and two others previously discovered, are part of a 13-vessel transport fleet intentionally sunk by the British in Newport Harbor in 1778 to keep French ships from landing to aid the Americans' drive for independence. 
Cook, acknowledged by historians as one of the greatest navigators of all time, is credited with surveying Australia's east coast on the Endeavour expedition.
Divers found ballast piles about 9 to 11 metres underwater, with the ship's keel and other parts embedded in the sea floor.
They also found at least one cannon, an anchor with a 5 metre shank and a cream-coloured fragment of an 18th century British ceramic teapot. 
But he says any amount of benzene in food is undesirable and FSANZ is working with soft-drink manufacturers to find ways of reducing levels to a minimum.
Ascorbic acid reacts with copper and iron found in water to from hydroxyl radicals and these radicals can react with benzoic acid to form low levels of benzene, says FSANZ.
FSANZ plans to release a fact sheet on benzene in soft drinks on its website within a week to 10 days.
Given a choice, goats like the taste of truffles, onions, apples and garlic. But when faced with oranges, like these ones on the Greek island of Crete, they just can't refuse
Goats and sheep prefer the taste of truffles, according to a new study that shows these ruminants have a wide palate with some suprising favourite flavours.
"We didn't test why this is the case, but it may be because goats generally have a more catholic [varied] diet than do sheep in the natural world, and so will eat a range of things with different flavours."
The researchers treated nutritionally-enhanced food pellets with a range of synthetic, human-grade flavourings, avoiding the bitter flavours goats and sheep tend to dislike.
"My view regarding these flavours is that they are highly attractive, even though rare, because of health affects associated with consumption, for example anti-parasitic [action on] worms for garlic and onion," says Gordon.
He also explains that the researchers did not give real truffles, onions and other foods associated with the flavours to the animals because they wanted to study the animals' preferences for flavours alone, independent of nutritional content.
We had sex with you? No!
Our early ancestors interbred with chimpanzees after the two species drew apart millions of years ago, a new paper suggests. 
"The ... analysis revealed big surprises, with major implications for human evolution," says Professor Eric Lander, director of the Broad Institute of Harvard University  and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and co-author of the paper in today's issue of the journal Nature. 
"The fact that it has human-like features suggest that human-chimp speciation may have occurred over a long period with episodes of hybridisation [inter-breeding] between the emerging species." 
It is packed with 3141 genes and linked to 350 illnesses including cancer, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease, according to a report today in the journal Nature. 
Scientists who argue the hobbit is really just a modern human with a small brain have published evidence for the first time in a major scientific journal.
Martin says the study, led by brain evolution expert Professor Dean Falk of Florida State University, compared the hobbit with only one microcephalic, which he now says is a child, when the researchers should have been comparing it with a microcephalic adult.
Planetary system around the star HD 69830, with its three Neptune-sized planets and an asteroid belt
They found three planets orbiting within the same distance that Earth orbits the Sun.
Surprisingly, the hunt turned up no sign of a large Jupiter-class planet, making HD 69830 the first extrasolar planetary system without a massive planet.
The pesticide diazinon was introduced into Australia in the 1950s as a sheep 'dip' to combat the problem. But within six years blowflies developed a high level of resistance to it.
But when the researchers conducted the same experiment with another pesticide malathion, they found resistance genes both in the old blowflies and the modern blowflies, showing there was pre-existing resistance.
Willcocks says more data is required before NICNAS can determine if nanomaterials have unique toxicological properties compared ito materials with a larger particle size.
She says NICNAS is meeting with its industry committee today and is proposing to set up a working group with industry and the community to develop a strategy on how to deal with nanomaterials.
Executive director Bronywn Capanna says ACCORD and its member companies would co-operate with the regulatory agencies should the report raise any relevant significant issues.
On Earth, the fusion would take place in a reactor fuelled by two istopes of hydrogen, deuterium and tritium, with helium as the waste product. 
It is designed to be a testbed of fusion technologies, with a construction period of about 10 years and an operational lifespan of 20 years. 
Scarecrows have moved away from the veggie patch. Hi-tech scarecrows are now scaring birds away from fish farms, with help from the web and a mobile phone
The Intelligent Scarecrow is dressed in like an American football player, with helmet and baggy jersey. But it is brains, not brawn, that make it a threat.
The helmet conceals an internet-enabled videocamera that takes in a wide field of view, which can be accessed via a website. A microprocessor with image processing software the students wrote scans for colour and shape differences between frames.
If the software sees bright orange, it will not trigger a response. So a farmer wearing a bright orange vest can tend crops without being seen as a threat. 
"The area it would cover is not practical with a 10- to 100-acre fish farm," he says. 
The plastic tile is filled with solar cells and connects to a house's hot water system and electrical wiring.
Sebastian Braat, a graduate of the University of Western Sydney, says the tiles are designed with urban dwellings in mind - particularly the new generation of so-called "McMansion" style suburban homes. 
Dr Dong Chen, a research scientist with CSIRO Manufacturing and Infrastructure Technology, who wasn't involved in the design, says it makes sense to use roof tiles, or any exposed parts of a house, for solar heating.
Alcoholic drinks made with artificial sweeteners lead to a high rate of alcohol absorption, resulting in a greater blood alcohol concentration than from drinks made with sugar-based mixers, a new study has found.
On one day, the subjects consumed an orange-flavoured vodka drink made from alcohol and a mixer sweetened with sugar containing 478 calories.
On the second day, the men drank the same amount of alcohol with a diet mixer containing 225 calories. 
Peak blood alcohol concentrations were substantially greater with diet drinks at an average of 0.05%, while regular drinks measured at 0.03% blood alcohol concentration.
The pre-Big Bang gravity basically shredded the space-time fabric and left only the physics of atoms - quantum physics - to work with.
To peer into that unimaginable crush, Ashtekar and colleagues started gain without assuming that the "fabric" of space-time continuum existed in the earliest moments of the universe. 
Instead, the team applied what's called loop quantum gravity, a strategy that has been developed to join quantum physics with Einstein's General Relativity. 
Could those irregularities, combined with loop quantum gravity, reveal patterns inherited from the earlier universe?
He says that a muscle involved in eye movement also directly controls ear motion. That's why when we look left or right, our ears slightly withdraw on both sides.
Up to 35% of the apes in some communities were infected with SIV and different varieties or "clades" of the virus were found. 
She says chimps separated by a river were infected with different clades,
"Imagine making a hole in the cloth by inserting a pointed object between the threads without tearing them." 
The light, or microwaves, or radar would travel along the threads of the cloth, ending up behind the object without having touched it. 
The Duke University researchers started working on metamaterials with a grant from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). 
The researchers came up with the idea of using these materials to bend light and other electromagnetic radiation. 
He and his colleagues triggered the odd trick using optical fibre laced with the element erbium, the same kind of fibre used in telecommunications.
They split a burst of laser light, sending one beam through the optical fibre and allowing the other to travel without interference.
So ultimately, one pulse entered and one emerged, but with timing that appeared to violate light's natural speed limit.
These and other experiments with weird light are suddenly possible because of new light-dispersive materials, more sensitive technology to detect what light is doing, and because optics researchers are simply paying more attention to the strange things light does in odd materials.
"Up until several years ago people were not familiar with the concepts of slow and fast light," says Boyd.
Ishii explains that the white and yellow colours are associated with the sexual stages for Eurotium fungi.
The parasite produces threadlike filaments that terminate with circular, colourful structures called ascomata that are involved in reproduction.
Yuichi Chigusa, a medical parasitologist and entomologist at Dokkyo Medical University's School of Medicine, says that fly larvae usually infest corpses within an hour to a half-day after the victims' death. They are then followed by Coleoptera (beetles) and fungi.
"I am surprised that fungus is a potential tool for determining post mortem intervals in cadavers without infestation of dipteran larvae and/or beetles," Chigusa says. 
Along with several colleagues, Sullivan co-authored the first detailed study of the new dinosaur, published recently in the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science Bulletin.
Dracorex hogwartsia, which translates to Dragon King of Hogwarts, was unearthed in 2003 in the Hell Creek Formation of South Dakota by three amateur fossil hunters working with the Children's Museum of Indianapolis. 
But how did it get its name? A group of children at the Children's Museum of Indianapolis drew the connection to the fanciful school of witchcraft that the famous fictional wizard Harry Potter attends and came up with the name hogwartsia.
"I happen to know more on the subject of palaeontology than many might credit, because my eldest daughter was Utahraptor-obsessed and I am now living with a passionate Tyrannosaurus rex-lover, aged three.
"My credibility has soared within my science-loving family, and I am very much looking forward to reading Dr Bakker and his colleague's paper describing 'my' dinosaur."
Among subjects who were physically active, an increase in IGFBP-3 was associated with a 48% reduction in colon cancer-specific deaths. There seemed to be no association with IGF-1. 
The researchers conclude that increased levels of IGFBP-3 with exercise blocks IGF-1's proliferative effect on cell growth.
A robot with a flexible, trunk-like arm could one day work like an elephant to grasp unwieldy loads, say its developers.
Conventional robots have rigid joints; picture a crane-like appendage with a claw-shaped hand.
Walker and a team of researchers from eight institutions in the US and Israel built a strong, dexterous robotic arm that uses tubes pumped with compressed air to mimic the muscles that control tongues, trunks and tentacles.
Based on the students' responses, Conway and Wood conclude that a person's perception of the impact of an event is a good marker for meaning making, that is the process that results in an individual integrating an event with his or her positive sense of identity. 
Conway and Wood found that when the study participants reflected on negative events, such as conflict with bosses or teachers, death, or physical or sexual assault, they reported that they currently felt less negative emotions, like anger and disgust, and more happiness and pride than they had felt at the time of the event. 
"Everyone can experience strong emotional reactions in extreme situations, and everyone needs to come to terms with such events in order to maintain a positive sense of self, and a positive sense of the world at large."
"If you want to generate a lot of power from microbial fuel cells, you have to have a very thin reactor. But you also need to be able to work with a high volume of waste water." 
He says the research, which was carried out with UK, US and Canadian researchers, could be useful in controlling pest outbreaks that devastate crops and bring disease.
Sue Vintiner, a forensic scientist with New Zealand's Environmental Science and Research (ESR), says the technology could have practical applications.
Poison ivy, a species introduced to Australia and now a weed, will grow faster and become more poisonous with increased CO2 levels
They compared poison ivy growth over a six-year period in three CO2-enriched areas and three areas with normal air. 
Construction of the Global Seed Vault, in a mountainside on the island of Svalbard 1000 kilometres from the North Pole, would start in June with completion due in September 2007.
The doomsday vault would be built near Longyaerbyen, Svalbard's main village, with space for three million seed varieties.
Norway has long talked of building the Arctic seed vault without previously taking action.
Norway has worked with the UN Food and Agriculture Organization on the plans.
But Moore, along with Australian and Indonesian colleagues, think otherwise.
This supports the idea that the hobbit, even with its small brain, was capable of making the tools found alongside it, says Moore.
He previously reported that such tools could be made without the degree of forethought usually associated with modern humans.
"They are certainly within the capabilities of a small-brained hominid."
Saturn's moon Enceladus might have rolled or rotated itself to place an area of low density at the south pole. This illustrates the moon's interior, with warm, low-density material rising to the surface (yellow) from within or from its rocky core (red)
It could also have emerged from within its frigid and rocky core.
This surveyed period kicks off with an astonishingly warm period called the Palaeocene-Eocene thermal maximum. At one point during this era, the Arctic Ocean was 23&deg;C.
"At times, the drill site was covered with ice 2-3 metres thick," says one of the lead authors, Jan Blackman, a professor at Stockholm University. 
Researchers at CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology analysed climate change models and predicted by 2050 there would be a 5-12% increase in the number of days with a high, very high or extreme fire danger. 
To do this, he developed a model that combined the CSIRO and meteorology bureau predictions with historical records of fires from the Blue Mountains area to the west and the Central Coast area to the north of Sydney.
"China, India, Russia and others ... such as Poland [representing eastern Europe] could also make significant advances, along with simpler ones," the report says of what it describes as scientifically proficient countries.
These countries could, for example, "provide their people with drug therapies that preferentially attack specific tumors or pathogens ... [and] vastly improved medical diagnostic and surgical procedures". 
"Large asteroids such as Eros are completely covered with a thick regolith, a blanket of looser material created by space weathering. With Itokawa, we believe we have witnessed a developing stage of the formation of this regolith." 
Itokawa is very small, just 500 metres long. But it is close, orbiting just 516 million kilometres away from Earth. Although it does not threaten to collide with Earth, it makes a tempting scientific target. 
At one point, Hayabusa lost communication with its controllers, writes Associate Professor Erik Asphaug of the University of California, Santa Cruz in a commentary in Science. 
But what was interesting was that the coastline, where Australia would have fitted together with Antarctica, took a 'bite' out of the concentric rings or shock waves, around the crater.
Von Frese's report has been met with a mixed response from the Australian scientific community.
He says he will now make it a priority to process the data and share it with the other researchers to see if it supports the theory.
In this variety, known as parthenocarpic figs, the fruit develops without insect pollination and is prevented from falling off the tree, which allows it to become soft, sweet and edible. 
Earth's oceans bulge with tides because of the external gravitational tug of the Moon. Likewise, the Magellanic Clouds may cause the bulge in the far side of the Milky Way, he explains.
The number 666 is associated with Satan and may people believe it is a bad omen
Bigelow says much of the imagery in Revelation has a schizophrenic quality and is often invoked by people with schizophrenia.
Conjuring up thoughts of doom, Satan and rampaging evil in relation to a number is an example of magical thinking, Stevens says, where things associated with good things bring food fortune and things associated with disastrous events bring negative consequences.
Richardson, a food technology liaison officer with Food Science Australia, says provided the cold chain is kept "you wouldn't expect a significant loss of nutrients".
Subsequent papers argued various alternative theories, including that they were formed by hydrothermal deposits that produced a mineral crust with structures mimicking stromatolites.
"Stromatolites in the modern environment [are] associated with a whole community of organisms, so potentially we're talking about much more diversity than just seven types of organisms," she says.
Similar structures have been produced in the laboratory without microbes, he says.
"This certainly supports the notion  ...  of life getting a firm foothold and flourishing [in association] with something quite normal."
Planemos, short for planetary mass objects, are a cross between a star and a planet. Astronomers compare them with a brown dwarf, seen here surrounded by a swirling mass of planet-forming dust and gas
Scientists also found a disc-skirted planemo interacting with a brown dwarf, a failed star, even closer to Earth, just 170 light-years away. 
These objects, with several times the mass of the giant planet Jupiter but 100 times less massive than our Sun, are cosmic infants only a few million years old.
But Earth's rocky moon was probably born when our world collided with another heavenly body early on, and Mars' moons were asteroids captured by the planet's gravity. 
Australia has roughly the same chance of winning the World Cup as you have tossing three sixes with three dice, says a sports statistician.
"It's slightly more than flipping eight heads in a row (1 in 256) or tossing three sixes with three dice (1 in 216)."
He says, if one team is expected to kick two goals in a match and another is expected  to only kick one, the stronger side still only has a 61% chance of winning, with a 21% chance of a draw. The weaker team has an 18% chance of winning.
At the latest analysis the figures showed perennial favourite Brazil has a 29% chance of winning, followed by England with a 10% chance.
Trinidad and Tobago is ranked at the bottom of the ladder with a demoralising 0% chance of winning the World Cup.
"I've taken a combination of the public's opinion as well as past data and my own statistical expertise to come up with a statistical model that predicts a team's chances," he says.
"When we factor a draw in we come up with 38%  Australia, 31% Japan, 31% the draw. It's pretty much a hedged result."
When faced with a tough medical decision, imagine that you're making it for a friend rather than for yourself, a new study suggests. 
"We think that it's understandably easy to get caught up in the difficulty of the moment - a patient has just been diagnosed with a problem, they're facing a complex treatment decision; it's hard to see the big picture," says Dr Brian Zikmund-Fisher of the University of Michigan.
This is when a person faced with a medical decision may choose passive nonintervention rather than an active approach due to fear of causing harm to themselves. 
In the second, participants were asked to decide on whether or not to treat a slow-growing cancer with chemotherapy. 
The researchers also used histamines, compounds produced by mammalian tissues to dilate small blood vessels. Histamines are largely responsible for the itchiness associated with allergies, hence the relief provided by antihistamines.
Interestingly enough, Mogil and his team found that individuals sensitive to pain are more resistant to itch, while those with less pain sensitivity have a greater tendency to scratch.
But he says the new specimen, Isisfordia duncani, shares more features in common with modern crocodiles than any specimens found in the northern hemisphere.
"Crocodiles have incredible bursts of very violent energy and so you need a strong backbone to be able to withstand that," he says.
One specimen is almost a complete skeleton with just the snout and face of the crocodile missing. The other is a complete skull.
In an effort to learn more, up to 60 male swans at Melbourne's Albert Park Lake are being fitted with a tiny microchip attached to their tail feathers. 
The females, in turn, are being fitted with a miniature tracking device, known as a decoder. 
"There are risks associated with mating with other birds so there must be some evolutionary benefits," he says.
The Crab Nebula with a central pulsar surrounded by rings of high-energy particles
Hamilton spent 20 years studying pulsars and recalls one occasion where he was involved with a team using the Parkes telescope to take a second look at a suspicious sighting made by another telescope.
"I'm a hands-on person. If something breaks down in the office I'm there before anybody else with a screwdriver in the hand," he says.
It has huge quantities of carbon gas mixed with a cloud of dust surrounding a young, yellow star called Beta Pictoris.
Restricting an infant's diet without a clinical diagnosis of food allergy could place him or her at risk, researchers say
"[The findings] emphasise the need for accurate diagnosis to prevent infants being on unnecessarily restricted diets, which may be associated with inadequate nutrition in this important period of growth and development," the researchers conclude.
A new sensor made of nanomaterials could give robots a sense of touch like we have with our fingers
Robots equipped with such sensors could be used in minimally invasive surgery, where tiny incisions and tiny tools are used to target very specific areas in the body.
A robot's "hands" could be coated with the sensor film and the signals received could be used to guide the robot in performing surgery, say the researchers, in the same way that surgeons now use their sense of touch to find tumors or gallstones. 
Researchers say they've cured bubble boy disease in dogs and this has implications for humans with the genetic abnormality(Image: iStockphoto)
A new treatment has cured basset hounds with bubble boy disease, a life-threatening genetic disorder that disables the immune system, according to a recent study.
Boys diagnosed with the condition are given bone-marrow transplants that can replenish stem cells responsible for renewing new functional immune cells.
Gene therapy, in which the individual's own bone marrow cells are cultured in a lab with the normal gene, showed some success in treating 10 of 11 boys during a 1999 French study.
"Although ex-vivo (outside of the body) gene therapy has been shown to be capable of restoring normal immune function in XSCID boys, there are several potential problems with this approach," says Dr Peter J. Felsburg, who led the recent work and is a professor of immunology at the University of Pennsylvania 's School of Veterinary Medicine.
"Newborns affected with severe immunodeficiency look completely healthy at first because they have antibodies from their mother," Puck says.
Earth and Pluto will move exactly in line with a star in a rare astronomical event known as an occultation.
Amateur astronomers with large telescopes will also be attempting to view the occultation, good weather conditions permitting. 
"The signature of that light curve, how it diminishes with time, allows us to measure fundamental properties of the atmosphere - what it's made of, its temperature and how extensive it is."
 The hormone, often associated with brawn and aggressiveness, fluctuates over the seasons in both men and women.
Van Anders, a doctoral candidate in behavioural neuroendocrinology, says "This suggests that patterns of fat deposition, but not overall fat, are slightly different depending on the season, with more fat being deposited in the central waist region in autumn (in women)".
"As well, a large body of research finds that lower waist-to-hip ratios are associated with better fertility parameters and health parameters. This suggests that women should be perceived as slightly less attractive in autumn."
A vacuum-based robot could climb tall buildings more efficiently than those with suction caps and claws, its designer says
But those grippers are only as good as the surface they make contact with.
"In both aspects, the City Climber is probably the best in the world right now," says Xi, who is not associated with the project.
By linking two triangular-shaped modules with a hinged arm, the researchers were able to make the City Climber manoeuver around 90 degree angle corners and transition from a wall to a roof, all with the strength to pull or carry a payload four times its weight.
Xiao plans to equip his rover with a high-resolution digital camera.
"The one caveat is that all our work is done in a laboratory system using cultured cells with purified compounds," she says.
Physicist David Browning, an adjunct professor at the University of Rhode Island, and Dr Peter Scheifele, a research associate at the University of Connecticut are compiling the database in an attempt to correlate nuances in horse whinnies with their differences stress levels.
Browning and Scheifele have begun compiling their database of horse vocalisations from their own recordings and from those of other researchers. The vocalisations are analysed with acoustic software that plots the sound over time.
"One [zebra] is like a horse with harems and lives in groups, whereas another is more solitary. Differences in vocalisations might reflect differences in the social organisation," she says.
There's enough gold buried deep within the Earth's core to cover the entire land surface of the planet to a depth of half a metre, an Australian researcher says.
Wood and colleagues chart the early history of our Earth's development starting with the birth of the solar system more than 4.5 billion years ago.
"We know that within about 10,000 years these formed into small bodies that were about 10 kilometres across."
During the planet's development, this "magma ocean" reacted with metals in the planetesimals, extracting many of the most important and interesting elements, including gold, and eventually depositing them in the Earth's own iron-rich core. 
To calculate how much gold was in the Earth's core Wood compared the composition of the Earth's crust with that of meteorites, which can be used to represent planetesimals. 
Commercial aircraft account for only a small contribution compared with power stations, industry and road traffic. 
ANSTO says the radiation released from its site was well within regulatory limits and will not affect the health of workers or the community
The opposition Labor party claims the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) has withheld details about an accident at the Lucas Heights facility in Sydney last week.
"The releases which occurred last Thursday evening were not outside the normal release pattern, were well within regulatory limits and could not be detected off-site," the statement said.
"Accidents like this show that the community is right to be concerned about the safety of nuclear reactors," Macklin said. "This accident is a stark reminder that things can go wrong with nuclear reactors." 
But ANSTO rejected Macklin's linking of last week's incident with nuclear reactor safety.
"The incident did not occur in the reactor, and has nothing to do with reactor safety," it said.
Spectacular 100-million-year-old fossils, complete with three-dimensional bones, feathers and foot webbing, suggest living birds evolved from waterfowl, say researchers.
He says Gansus is the oldest example of the nearly modern birds that branched off the trunk of the family tree that began with the famous proto-bird Archaeopteryx, which provided evidence that birds evolved from dinosaurs. 
In the Cretaceous period, 100 million years ago, it would have been a lake, surrounded by lush plant life, filled with crocodiles and fish, and with dinosaurs and early mammals prowling on land. 
At the end of each arm was a chamber filled with treats. One side had a low reward  - one sugar pellet - while the other side had three to five sugar pellets.
When the pain yielded too little gain, they stuck with the tiny treat.
This is comparable to how a car purchaser may enter a dealership with a budget in mind. Since this standard varies depending on the situation, it is possibly part inherent and part created by individuals.
He also recently authored a paper in Current Psychiatry Reviews  that determined problems in the brain associated with effort-related processes, such as how much energy an individual will put out to obtain a reward, could be linked to depression.
This suggests rats get depressed too. Salamone's own research indicates interference with dopamine, a neurotransmitter chemical in the brain, may make individuals less likely to work for rewards and biased toward low-effort alternatives.
"By better understanding how the brain is altered with this syndrome, we can develop better drugs in the future." 
The researchers tested the theory that migraine and sexual desire may both be associated with serotonin. 
Reduced libido often accompanies depression treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), which increases brain levels of serotonin, whereas migraine is associated with reduced serotonin levels.
Thus, women with migraines reported about the same relative levels of sex drive as men with tension type headaches. 
On the nine-point scale the subjects specifically rated their own sexual desire compared with that of others of the same age and sex.
Those with tension-type headaches gave themselves an average rating of 3.7 for this item. 
"The attempt by Japan to turn the whaling commission back into a whaling club shows just how out of touch they are with world opinion," he says.
"This is the most significant setback since (the moratorium) came into force," says Kitty Block, a lawyer with Humane Society International.
The weekend resolution, proposed by commission hosts St Kitts and Nevis, passed by 33 to 32 votes with one abstention. 
Doctors in the future may sniff patients with an electronic "nose" to detect telltale odours released as a result of disease and illness.
So far, the researchers have worked with an olfactory receptor protein from rats and one from humans.
In humans, however, the brain cannot seem to keep up with the nose.
"Initially we expect that the devices will work with body fluids like urine or blood."
Police in the US have launched what they say is the future of law enforcement in the form of a drone aircraft, bringing technology usually associated with combat zones to urban policing. 
The drone is equipped with low-light and infrared capabilities and can fly at speeds up to 48 kilometres per hour for 70 minutes. 
Once launched, the craft is set to fly autonomously with global positioning system (GPS) coordinates and a fixed flight pattern. 
As technology improves, the drone will be outfitted with zoom capabilities. For now, the craft simply flies lower to hone in on its target.
In the second period of observed instability, an adult female named Cat ran off with a high-ranked male for several days.
When she returned, a "Cat-fight" ensued with the other females. The fights not only lowered the status of Cat, but also placed the unfortunate baboon's daughter, sisters, aunt and their children to the bottom of the hierarchy.
"When she left the troop with the alpha male, more than half of the troop's females were cycling, so there was probably quite a bit of competition between the females to catch the alpha's eye."
Engh says friendships with less aggressive males and grooming with females seems to reduce the females' fear and stress.
Professor Joan Silk, a University of California at Los Angeles anthropologist noted for her work on the evolution of social behaviour in primates, says she has worked at the same reserve where the new study took place, and that this "account seems consistent with what I know of the females there."
Baboons in their natural habitat appear to cope with stress better than humans do, Engh says.
Each time, the sea floor was recolonised and the coral reef returned in a very similar structure with the same species.
Built with top security, the A$4 million (US$3 million) depository will preserve around three million seeds representing all known varieties of the world's crops at sub-zero temperatures.
"This is the only major problem in the world right now that I say, with a straight face, 'We can actually solve this!' "He says.
The Trust will work closely with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation to help support gene banks around the world, which will remain the first line of defence. 
Hwang, once referred to as South Korea's "supreme scientist", was indicted on May 12 with five other scientists on charges in connection with the bogus research and the disappearance of millions of dollars in donations. 
Some 100 supporters of Hwang disrupted the hearing with boos and shouts despite the presence of dozens of police inside and outside the court. 
It says the new gene, called BARD1, works in tandem with the well-known BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes to raise the risk of breast cancer by as much as 80%.
"The BARD1 variant works together with the BRCA2 mutation in Iceland and increases the likelihood of breast cancer from 45% in those who have only the BRCA2 mutation up towards 100% in those who also have the BARD1 variant," says deCODE chief executive Kari Stefansson. 
And women with the BARD1 variant who develop breast cancer are more likely to have tumours in both breasts, Stefansson said. 
Breast cancer is known to run in families and has a genetic component, although most cases occur in people with no family history of the disease. 
The deCODE team is trying to find other genes that work with these genes.
This BARD1 mutation has been found in Italian and Finnish families with a history of breast and ovarian cancer.
"Therefore, the variant may be restricted to individuals with European ancestry and could contribute to the higher load of breast cancer seen in this group," they say.
Dr Alexandra Grutter and colleagues from the University of Queensland's School of Integrative Biology report their experiments with the Great Barrier Reef coral reef cleaner fish (Labroides dimidiatus), in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Grutter says the answer lies in the fact that client fish watch cleaners while they are with other clients to see who is doing a good job to judge who to use themselves.
Grutter used an aquarium-based experiment in which client fish were offered the choice of interacting with two cleaner fish: one that displayed parasite-eating behaviour, and one that did not. 
And cleaner fish were more likely to do the right thing when they were being observed by other clients than when they were alone with one client. 
Each played the role of the head of a fictitious country that is in conflict with a neighbour over a vast field of diamonds on a disputed border. 
Players could negotiate deals in which they could get access to the disputed diamonds, thus adding to their wealth, but they also had the option of waging war at any time and without provocation.
The researchers' theory is that humans have a built-in bias towards optimism because it is a survival mechanism. By encouraging hope, called "positive illusions," our distant ancestors could cope with adversity, strengthen their resolve and bluff their opponents.
"When you tamper with the living things, you have an impact on physical structures."
The researchers say that, searching through museum collections, they found bead-like shells with holes in them from sites in Skhul, Israel and Oued Djebbana, Algeria. 
By studying modern Nassarius shells from Mediterranean beaches, they also determined that shells with single holes in the centre are rare in nature and that Skhul and Djebbana inhabitants must have purposely perforated or deliberately picked out such shells, arguably for symbolic use.
Grown-ups today are more immature than ever, according to research showing that increasing numbers of adults are retaining behaviour and attitudes normally associated with youth.
In the mid 20th century, however, another force kicked in, with an increasing trend for individuals to change jobs, learn new skills, move to new places and make new friends.
Formal education now extends well past physical maturity, leaving students with minds that are, he says, "unfinished".
Charlton says past cultures often marked the advent of adulthood with initiation ceremonies.
The faults of youth are retained along with the virtues, he believes.
At least "youthfulness is no longer restricted to youth," he says due to overall improvements in food and healthcare, along with cosmetic technologies.
The scientists, who are developing the technology in collaboration with researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in the United States, also hope to get it to accept other inputs such as posture and gesture. 
"For example, a webcam linked with our software could process your image, encode the correct emotional state and transmit information to a Web site." 
"We are working with a big car company and they envision this being employed in cars within five years," Robinson says, adding that a camera could be built into the dashboard. 
The newly identified Kalkarindji Continental Flood Basalt Province covered at least 650,000 square kilometres with more than 190,000 cubic kilometres of lava, report geologists Dr Linda Glass and Dr David Phillips, who were at the Australian National University when the research was undertaken.
First in one area by a few geologists, then with a flurry of discoveries by other geologists who were working on other parts of the puzzle, but hadn't seen the larger context.
Chinese feng shui and the ancient Indian science of vaastu shastra can boost business by helping web designers create better pages, say experts who are marrying traditional philosophies with the internet. 
"Just as the world comprises of the five basic elements, each web site has five elements and these need to be in balance with one another," says Dr Smita Narang, author of Web Vaastu .
The book has proved popular with businesses. 
He says each must be chosen carefully to strike a balance with the other.
The study, led by Dr Anthony Bogaert of Brock University near Toronto, found that having older brothers increases a man's chance of being gay, even if the older brothers don't live with the younger sibling.
"Only biological older brothers, and not any other sibling characteristic, including non-biological older brothers, predicted men's sexual orientation, regardless of the amount of time reared with these siblings." 
Bogaert reports that the age of the mother also appears related to the sexual orientation of her sons, "with homosexual men's mothers being significantly younger than the mothers of heterosexual men".
Professor Roger Short, a reproductive biologist in the faculty of Medicine at Melbourne University, says there could be a social element in younger brothers with lots of older male siblings becoming gay.
"That could make you more aligned with ... the same sex because you'd be so ignorant and terrified about the opposite sex."
The architectural team is working with university research groups to finish two vibration-harvesting prototypes by December.
The second prototype is a wireless lighting system that will use tiny generators with components designed to resonate at the same frequency as surrounding vibrations.
This "super-rotation," combined with the natural recycling of hot air in the atmosphere, would logically induce a vortex over each pole, but the mystery is why there should be two vortices. 
It went into elongated orbit around Venus on 11 April, equipped with scanners aimed at deciphering the enigmatic Venusian atmosphere. 
The planet seems to have a case of runaway global warming, and understanding the mechanisms that drive this could be of use in dealing with climate change on Earth.
Its atmosphere is 96% carbon dioxide, with yellowish clouds of sulfur and sulfuric acid droplets.
The creators of free educational games such as "Darfur is Dying" and "PeaceMaker" met with humanitarian activists at The New School university in New York this week for the third Games for Change annual conference. 
Academics were asked to put money in the box for any tea, coffee and milk they used without anyone checking to see whether they were actually doing so. 
"If we understood the physics of the permeability enhancement well enough, the vibrations could be tuned to increase with the flow of oil," Brodsky says.
They are also interested in studying how seismically induced changes in fluid flow within geological faults might trigger further earthquakes.
NASA administrator Mike Griffin acknowledges he is taking a chance, but not with the lives of the astronauts, who could stay aboard the station for nearly three months while they wait for a new ride home if Discovery should suffer Columbia-like damage during its liftoff.
"If we have another major incident in launching the space shuttle, I would not wish to continue with the program," Griffin said.
The station has been operating with just two-man crews since Columbia's demise to save on supplies while the shuttle, which delivers the bulk of the station's cargo, was grounded.
His team found that preschoolers who stuttered were typically more excitable than their peers with normal speech, and tended to have a harder time calming down or shifting their attention away from a stressful situation. 
Conture says the findings are in line with what parents often tell their child's doctor or speech therapist: that emotional outbursts or excitement seem to trigger stuttering episodes. 
Parents may be able to help their child by demonstrating ways to calmly cope with stressful situations, says Conture. 
Only 30% of people surveyed felt comfortable with GM plants for food and only 18% felt comfortable with GM animals for food
Australians are becoming more comfortable with new technologies like stem cell research but still have strong reservations about genetically modified foods, a new survey shows.
"The interesting thing about the last three years is that people seem to be becoming more comfortable with the technologies that we've been monitoring," Gilding says.
Research conducted in public institutes garnered a higher approval rating, and men tended to be more comfortable than women with the research.
"That was the stand-out from our point of view," Gilding says. "Overall, people are still very uncomfortable with those technologies."
Only 30% said they were comfortable with GM plants for food, the researchers found.
When respondents were asked to rate their comfort level with GM crops, they gave an average score of 3.9 on a scale where zero was 'not at all comfortable' and 10 represented 'very comfortable'.
The survey also found that just 18% of people were comfortable with genetically modifying animals for food, giving an average score of 3.1 out of a possible 10.
For example, individuals will view the risks and benefits of GM foods differently depending on the food, he says. "Attitudes to GM wheat will be different to doughnuts with GM soy in them."
An unusual Antarctic sea spider with five pairs of legs. Its large proboscis is protruding towards the bottom of the picture
"They look like spiders, but they are not real spiders," says Arango. "It's been very hard to place them in a position within the tree of life."
"We have difficult, technically complex and subtle decisions to make ... We did the best analysis we can, and we make a decision, and I'm comfortable with that." 
Questions have also been raised about what, exactly, scientists have achieved with the creation of Dolly.
The reconstructed egg is then treated with a jolt of electricity and placed in a dish of nurturing chemicals to make it divide.
But the miscarriage rate of transplanted eggs is extremely high, and of those embryos that make it to term, many have deformities or, as happened with Dolly, die prematurely, a clear warning to any scientist mad or foolish enough to try to make a cloned baby. 
So if cloning is frustrating, costly and potentially risky, why bother with it? 
And a farm animal that can be engineered and cloned to produce rare pharmaceutical proteins in its milk, Dolly was created with this in mind, could help save lives and ease suffering.
Scientists have come up with a way to produce a chemical from fruit sugar that they say is remarkably similar to one that comes from petroleum.
The method, reported by Professor James Dumesic of the University Wisconsin, Madison, could put plants such as corn on par with petroleum, reducing our dependency on petroleum products and creating more environmentally friendly ones.
"The nice thing about using biomass as a replacement for all these petroleum products is that it is greenhouse neutral," saysYuriy Roman-Leshkov, who with Dumesic and colleagues reported their findings in the current issue of Science.
When a plant-based product eventually decomposes or is burned, as in the case with fuel, it doesn't introduce additional carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, the way petroleum products do, he says.
Molecules that come from petroleum are easy to work with and can be strung together in different combinations to produce everything from the polyester of a leisure suit to the polypropylene of a fleece jacket to the polyethylene terephthalate of a two litre bottle of soft drink.
Not so easy with biological molecules
But doing the same thing with biological molecules is not so easy.
The process causes the sugar to lose three water molecules, which blend in with the rest of the water. The leftover substance becomes the chemical hydroxymethylfurfural, or HMF.
Saturated with chlorine
In the 1990s the stratosphere over Antarctica saw the first of this sort of "saturation effect", says Newman, with 100% ozone destruction and plenty of chlorine and bromine to spare.
There can be no significant change in ozone destruction until the levels of harmful chemicals at least drop below the saturation level. The new model estimates that will happen by 2018, with a detectable reduction in ozone destruction by 2024.
Controversy had swirled around the pioneering operation carried out by a team led by Professor Bernard Devauchelle in Amiens, northern France, with critics suggesting it was fraught with surgical and psychological peril. 
"The technical feasibility of the procedure has been clearly demonstrated, with no surgical complication," says Devauchelle, whose paper is published online. 
"The functional result will be assessed in the future, but this graft can already be deemed successful with respect to appearance, sensitivity, and acceptance by the patient."
But he warned, "failure of the [immunosuppressant] regimen chosen could prove devastating, with the possible loss of the transplanted face at any time". 
"I believed the test results brought to me by researchers that supported the findings in the papers," Hwang said. "Not all the responsibility for the fabrications lies with me."
Prosecutors have charged Hwang with misusing and embezzling the equivalent of US$2.96 million (A$3.98) in state funds and private donations as well as fraud and violating bioethics laws in procuring human eggs for his research. 
Hwang spoke with mounting emotion as he answered questions about the integrity of the science in his team's work. 
Vascular disease may be associated with particular types of migraine
Adults who suffer from bouts of migraine without aura have slightly narrower retinal blood vessels than adults without migraine, Australian research shows.
The finding supports the hypothesis that microvascular disease may be associated with certain types of migraine, investigators note.
People with a history of migraine without aura had narrower retinal blood vessels, or arterioles, than those with a history of migraine with aura or people with no history of migraine. 
"The only problem is that I really don't know what to do with it. I can't put it on show as no one can see it," he says. "I guess it'll just stay in my drawer for the time being." 
But when Tarlinton and her colleagues examined the virus in koalas throughout Australia they found that some populations were infected with the virus and others were free of it.
Together with other evolutionary evidence, this suggests that KoRV probably began invading the koala genome between 100 and 200 years ago, Young says.
"The koala is having to live with the high levels of cancers ... and there's not a lot we can do about that in the wild," Young says.
For the scientists, the new findings offer a rare glimpse into what happens when an animal is faced with a viral challenge like this.
"Coming to grips with how the koala handles this initial viral onslaught may give us insights into the dynamic events that occurred millions of years ago when retroviruses first invaded the human genome," Young says.
He and his team have designed a plastic 'starshade' measuring 45 metres in diameter that would orbit with a trailing telescope.
"We think this is a compelling concept, particularly because it can be built today with existing technology," says Professor Webster Cash of the University of Colorado, who outlines his proposal today in the journal Nature.
He adds that if Earth-like planets exist, the starshade could find them within the next decade.
One day, a ring of telescopes might be placed on the Moon with a fleet of orbiting starshades, Cash says. This would allow scientists to photograph distant planets.
DVDs coated with a light-sensitive protein may be able to store 50 terabytes (about 50,000 gigabytes) of data
DVDs coated with a layer of protein could one day hold so much information that storing data on your computer hard drive will be obsolete, says a US-based researcher.
These trade in terabytes of information with the transfer of information such as satellite images, imaging scans and movies.
"You have a compelling need that is not going to be met with the existing magnetic storage technology," he says.
When light shines on bR, it is converted to a series of intermediate molecules each with a unique shape and colour before returning to its 'ground state'.
In conjunction with NEC in Japan, Renugopalakrishnan's team has produced a prototype device and estimate a USB disk will be commercialised in 12 months and a DVD in 18 to 24 months.
For fuel to burn, it must be mixed with air. Conventional combustors premix the air with the fuel and inject the mixture into the bottom of a tube-shaped chamber.
"It's like having a very weak candle flame. Every time there is a breeze, it blows out. It's not very robust," says Zinn. "In our system, we can go to the lower temps without losing the flame."
Professor Claudio Soto of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston and colleagues infected hamsters with prions, the misfolded nerve proteins believed to cause the diseases, and then tested blood at various times. 
A second study in Science shows that mice infected with prions develop heart disease similar to a type known as amyloid heart disease in people.
Gene therapy has been beset with problems including the lack of a safe and effective vector to transport therapeutic genes into cells.
He also says the nanoparticles can be controlled more precisely than a virus because they can be moved into place with a magnet.
In vitro experiments have shown that iron oxide nanoparticles injected into stem cells can be vibrated with magnets to boost cell growth.
The ingredient, psilocybin, increases wellbeing and satisfaction with life two months after being taken, according to the research by scientists at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, which is published online today in the journal Psychopharmacology.
"Under very defined conditions, with careful preparation, you can safely and fairly reliably occasion what's called a primary mystical experience that may lead to positive changes in a person," study leader Professor Roland Griffiths says.
However, the study also reports that about a third of the volunteers experienced fear and anxiety after taking the psilocybin and McGregor says it should be avoided by anyone with schizophrenia or other psychotic illnesses.
The threat of bad weather can leave some people crippled with fear, psychologists say
But, Flores adds, in most causes people are very good at hiding the problem, which doesn't help them deal with it.
"In my case I'd sleep in the closet at night with a map and a flashlight to track the storm," Flores says.
The program is based on those that treat people with a fear of flying.
An expert on the subject, in this case a meteorologist, is teamed with a counseling psychologist to provide sufferers with more factual information about what they fear and teach them techniques for relaxing.
"There may be massive public resistance, as we've seen with nuclear power" if governments fail to convince voters that storage is safe, says Dr Bert Metz, co-chair of a 2005 United Nations report on carbon sequestration.
Proponents of carbon storage say the risks pale when compared with the threats of catastrophic climate change, which many scientists say will spur floods, droughts, heatwaves and could spread diseases and raise world sea levels. 
It estimates that the costs of generating electricity from a coal-fired power plant would typically rise to US$0.06-$0.10 per kilowatt hour with technology to capture and store carbon dioxide from US$0.04-US$0.05 on a power plant with no filters.
The research, published in the current issue of the journal Epidemiology, shows that new fathers in their 40s and 50s are slightly more likely to have an infant with a low Apgar score than fathers in their 20s. 
The Apgar score, which was first created in 1952, rates the newborn on respiratory effort, heart rate, reflex irritability, muscle tone and skin colour with a value of 0 to 2 for each.
In recent years, several reports have linked advanced paternal age with various adverse pregnancy outcomes, including foetal death and premature birth.
The team reports that compared with fathers in their 20s, those between 45 and 49 years of age and those 50 years of age or older were 64% and 49% more likely, respectively, to have an infant with a one minute Apgar score between 1 and 3. 
Fathers 45 years of age or older were at increased risk of having an infant with a five minute Apgar score of less than 7. 
However, some studies have shown that "expression of specific paternal genes is crucial for the placental development and that chromosomal aberrations tend to increase with paternal age." 
Reproductive medicine expert Professor Robert Jansen from the University of Sydney says fathers aged over 60 are also more likely to have children with serious genetic defects.
"Older women are more likely to have babies with problems and older women have older husbands."
A baby is born with adult-sized eyes. Though eyes don't grow, the distance between them does.
"By itself, it's one way of recognising the age. Combining it with other techniques would be the final way to approach this."
In fact, Gallagher hopes to combine the red-eye feature with other face recognition techniques - such as determining the amount of hair, hair colour, and number of wrinkles - to better pinpoint age.
Don't worry. No one will be showing up at your next birthday party with a device that calls you a liar. In fact, Kodak has not yet incorporated this technology into a product.
Vriesekoop worked with New Zealand researchers from the Eastern Institute of Technology to look at the types and number of bacterial cells found on money on both sides of the Tasman.
Back in the laboratory, the researchers bombarded the coins with pulses of sound to dislodge any microbes on the surface. They then identified and counted the number of viable bacteria.
These included low levels of coliforms such as Escherichia coli, bacteria typically associated with the colon and generally linked with poor hygiene; Staphylococcus aureus, a common organism with some strains that can cause disease in susceptible people; and Bacillus cereus, which causes food poisoning if cooking does not kill its tough spores.
He also hopes to work with the Royal Australian Mint to see how the raised surfaces of coins affect bacterial survival.
"This is the first step in an ongoing clinical trial of a device that is encouraging for its potential to help people with paralysis," says Dr Leigh Hochberg of Massachusetts General Hospital.
He is the first of four patients with spinal cord injuries, muscular dystrophy, stroke or motor neurone disease testing the brain-to-movement system developed by the company Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Systems.
The scientists implanted a tiny silicon chip with 100 electrodes into an area of the brain responsible for movement. The activity of the cells was recorded and sent to a computer that translated the commands and enabled the patient to move and control the external device. 
"This research suggests that implanted prosthetics are a viable approach for assisting severely impaired individuals to communicate and interact with the environment," he says in a commentary in the journal. 
A study of how baboons gesture with their hands suggests gesturing may have been a precursor to human language, scientists say.
The findings could help to explain why humans often gesture with their hands, and particularly the right hand, when they speak.
Among the baboons in the test group that favoured a certain hand, 78% were right-handed and tended to gesture with this hand. Other studies have shown that most human babies and deaf individuals also communicate with their right hands.
"I agree with the findings and think this is a very good and interesting paper. In many ways the results are nearly identical to those we have previously found in chimpanzees."
Penguins and seals are swimming around the Southern Ocean with sensors superglued to their heads in the name of science, a conference will hear this week.
Sensors to measure temperature, pressure and location are superglued to the animals' heads along with a radio transmitter that sends data to a satellite throughout their journey through the Southern Ocean.
In particular, he is studying 'fronts'. These are areas of strong current within the gigantic Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which links all the world's oceans.
By comparing maps of penguin and seal tracks with maps of the fronts, the researchers found the animals like to feed near the fronts which make them perfect spies for scientists.
"These grains come from areas that are almost at the opposite ends of Australia," Reith notes. "We were pretty happy with that."
The researchers could not directly link smoking marijuana with lung cancer. But they found evidence of precancerous changes in the lung like oxidative stress, damaged tumour-fighting cells, and DNA and tissue changes
Other factors that could make pot smokers prone to lung cancer, the researchers say, include the fact that they generally inhale more deeply and hold smoke in their lungs longer than cigarette smokers, and that marijuana is smoked without a filter.
Helper with 30-day-old pups
Turner says an increase in the speed of westerlies ties in with the prediction of more extreme storms in a warming world.
The review found that washing wounds, including leg ulcers, with water did not show an increase in infection or decrease in healing time, compared to using saline, she says.
It was a six-week double blind, randomised controlled trial in southwestern Sydney that studied the healing and infection rate in 49 wounds of 35 patients washed with saline, compared with equivalent patients who were washed with tap water.
"That tells us that if you have got clean tap water that you can drink, it is perfectly safe to wash wounds with that tap water if those wounds aren't infected."
Griffiths says washing wounds with tap water would save money in hospitals, especially the cost of the disposable sterile equipment that is required when using saline.
Patients also prefer washing with water, she says, because they can get out of bed and take a shower.
Using the stinky oil might help save seabirds, which often have fatal interactions with longline fisheries.
These fisheries use a line up to 100 kilometres long, often with additional branching lines.
Each line is rigged with hundreds or even thousands of barbed, baited hooks.
The repellent seems to have more to do with the noxious smell of the oil, or its consistency in the water, rather than the birds' fear of sharks.
Let's say, for your sake, it's the receptacle. Then it must be the Wizmark Urinal Communicator, a waterproof, disposable drain cover embedded with electronics that senses a visitor and then relays an audio message.
He worked as an inventor for several years to develop and patent a prototype and about one year later was under way with mass production.
Not only does the device act as a deodoriser with a disinfectant base, it also contains a proximity sensor that detects someone approaching within about 30 to 60 centimetres.
Just in case you are drunk, the Wizmark doesn't want to let you get away without a warning. Aside from advertising, it's being used to tout anti-drink-driving, safe sex, and anti-drug messages.
Deutsch is also working with various states and their associated health agencies on devices featuring cartoon characters or sports heroes to promote anti-drug messages in schools.
The large ground finch (Geospiza magnirostris) competed with its smaller-beaked cousin for food. But that balance changed once the climate shifted, triggering rapid evolution
As a result, G. fortis birds with smaller beaks that did not compete with the larger birds did better, and were more likely to have offspring. That essentially enriched the gene pool with small beak genes and led to more G. fortis with smaller beaks.
"Most of the birds that had large beaks before the drought disappeared," says Grant. That included almost all of the recently arrived G. magnirostris and any remaining G. fortis with especially large beaks.
The only birds that survived enough to mate and produce offspring in 2005 were the G. fortis with smaller beaks and an ability to exploit small seeds like those of the drought-tolerant Optunia cactus.
"Environmental changes severe enough to cause sharp population declines, as seen with the finches, are also selection events."
Implanting false memories of a bad experience with alcohol could prevent people abusing alcohol in later life, a Canadian researcher says.
In the study 142 people aged 18-20 were told they had had a bad past experience with alcoholic drinks including rum.
But prior bad experiences don't create an aversion to all foods and drinks, Bernstein says, only those with a distinct or unusual flavour.
We also form a particularly personal connection with music from our teen years because we tend to listen to the same songs over and over, his research indicates.
He analysed results from 1500 participants around the world with an average age of 36, including 23 Australians.
At least five aftershocks rattled the area after the quake, which hit around 3:19 pm local time on Monday (08:19 UTC), with the epicentre in the sea off Pangandaran southeast of Jakarta, according to Indonesia's seismology centre. 
Researchers at Stanford University School of Medicine tested sponges embedded with radio frequency identification (RFID) tags that were left in eight patients having abdominal or pelvic surgery.
"We need a system that is really fail-safe; where, regardless, of how people use this technology, the patient doesn't leave the operating room with a retained foreign body," he says.
If you're confronted with a familiar situation that seems oddly unrecognisable, you could be suffering from jamais vu
If you go out on a first date with someone and they only tell you good things about themselves it's not because they're being dishonest. They've genuinely repressed their bad points, a memory conference has heard.
"We asked them to think, you're going out with this person you've really liked for a long time, you want them to think you're funny, smart, clever, a nice person, so try and come up with things that would impress them," she says.
Positives included getting on well with their mothers, having lots of friends and helping elderly ladies carry bags.
Participants were split into two groups, with one required to concentrate on five negative points in their list and the other asked to concentrate on five positive points.
Indonesians fleeing this week's tsunami that lashed the south coast of Java had no warning, with a countrywide early warning system not due to be in place until 2009, officials say.
If installed as planned, buoys along Indonesia's vast archipelago working in conjunction with more than 100 seismographs would detect the speed of seismic waves to determine whether there was a risk of a tsunami. 
How could such a tiny minority have ruled a country so emphatically? How could it skirt assimilation with the native British majority and impose a language, laws, economy and culture whose stamp is visible today? 
The computer model uses various scenarios involving the size of the immigration influx, different ethnic intermarriage rates and the reproductive advantage of being Anglo-Saxon, with more wealth and resources. 
But in summer they are at high risk of sunburn unless they cover up with hats and sunscreen.
Ayton and colleagues studied the vitamin D levels and skeletal response to sunlight deprivation in 57 healthy adults (with an average age of about 38 years) during their winter in Australia's Antarctic program.
Flying from Antarctica to Australia will get polar expeditioners home much faster than by ship, but with less time to adjust to everyday life after months of extreme conditions, say researchers.
Problems adapting to Antarctic life include sleep disturbances, fatigue, lack of motivation as well as depressive or manic tendencies that can lead to conflicts with others in the group, severe problems with work or, in the worst case, suicide. 
An 8 metre rupture developed in the ground in the Afar's Dabbahu volcanic massif over a period of just three weeks, and swiftly filled up with molten rock. 
About 34 million years ago, Antarctica separated completely from South America, with the opening up of Drakes Passage.
As cold water is more oxygen rich than warm water, oxygen from Antarctic waters would have been able to then diffuse into the deep seas along with Antarctic octopuses, which then evolved into deep sea octopuses.
"The opening of the Drakes Passage fits in with evolution of the group," says Strugnell.
We can thank our verbal nature, along with our fingers, for the ability to develop complex number systems, a new study suggests.
The authors theorise that language and maths co-evolved in humans, with language probably emerging just ahead of basic mathematical concepts.
During the first stage, Wiese believes humans began using visual representations, such as symbols or other markings, to correspond with verbal indications of quantity.
Among the early evidence for that stage is a 30,000-year-old wolf bone, excavated in the Czech Republic, with notched tallies cut into it.
Finally, Wiese believes "a full-blown number concept" emerged in humans with the use of stable word-lists linked to amounts. Counting words and numbers, he says, do not merely refer to numbers. They are the numbers.
Counting words and mathematical concepts, therefore, are intertwined with our language skills, and even appear to be dependent upon them. Though the reverse is not the case.
Professor Terrence Deacon, a linguist at the University of California at Berkeley, agrees with many of the conclusions of Wiese's study.
In a study published last month in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Professor Yiyuan Tang and colleagues found that Chinese and English speakers not only have different ways of representing numbers with language, they also think about numbers with different parts of their brains.
A fifth-generation Canadian of Chinese and Filipino ancestry, Parungao says that with video game sales at about US$30 billion worldwide, making them more popular than movies, negative stereotypes matter. 
Professor Colin Dollery, a consultant to GlaxoSmithKline who co-chaired the taskforce, says tens of thousands of initial phase I trials are conducted without incident but the TeGenero episode highlightes the need for extra care with potent biotech drugs.
Other recommendations from the taskforce, which was set up by the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry and the UK's BioIndustry Association, include improvements in ascertaining the right starting dose, 'staggered dosing' as levels are increased and only conducting such trials in hospitals with intensive care facilities.
There are relatively few companies that currently offer such internet-based telephone services, and fewer checks are generally required compared to opening an account with a traditional telephone company. 
Hone says the scam, as in the California case, can appear legitimate to unsuspecting consumers because VoIP accounts can be set up with local telephone codes of a user's choice in a variety of cities or states. 
The study, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine today, is the first to directly compare high protein diets and those based on foods with a low glycaemic index or GI.
But the research shows low GI diets are better than high protein diets in reducing 'bad' or LDL (low density lipoprotein) cholesterol associated with cardiovascular disease.
Professor Jennie Brand-Miller, who co-authored The Low GI Diet Revolution with McMillan, was also involved in the research.
More recently, low GI diets gained popularity among dieters, with celebrities like Kylie Minogue reported to favour low GI foods.
A third diet, which was heavy on carbohydrates with a high GI, achieved the slowest rate of weight loss.
China has been experimenting with space-bred seeds for years, with rice and wheat exposed to the universe resulting in increased yields, the paper says. 
The nation has pursued some forms of genetically modified crops, with GMO tomatoes, soy beans and corn already in production.
Researchers say they have found the first evidence that the frozen outer reaches of our solar system could be littered with many more objects than we think.
But smaller objects have evaded detection as they are about 15 billion kilometres from the Sun, making it impossible to see them even with a powerful instrument like the Hubble Space Telescope.
The Kuiper belt community has greeted the news with some scepticsm. Some critics say that the apparent dimming of the stars may be due to effects in the Earth's atmosphere.
Transplants grown from a patient's own fat could be used with no need for anti-rejection drugs, Rodriguez says.
Vaccines made with bacteria killed by gamma rays may be more effective than those made using standard heat or chemical inactivation, US government researchers say. 
The listeria were killed with gamma rays and the vaccine protected mice infected with live listeria, unlike vaccines made with heat-killed bacteria. 
Most attenuated vaccines must be kept cold, but the researchers found that mice could be protected by vaccination with irradiated listeria that had been freeze-dried into a powder. 
This might mean that such vaccines could be used in hot places without electricity, the researchers say. 
"Measurement at this level is an extremely difficult thing to do because it's so much smaller than the things we normally deal with, getting down to almost atomic dimensions," says Miles, who is on an international committee responsible for setting measurement standards for nanotechnologies.
But if you have an oval-shaped nanoparticle, for example, do you measure its width or length? And how do you measure a nanoparticle with a rough surface?
"There is a need worldwide for a quick, convenient way of measuring nanoparticle sizes," says Miles. "If someone could come up with a way of doing that they would make a lot of money."
The smaller the particles, the more they jiggle, and the trick is to accurately calibrate their jiggling with standard metric measurements.
Information from the probe showed Titan, which is larger than the planet Mercury, is cold and windy with a dense atmosphere of methane and nitrogen.
"Imagine a compact body with four flippers, a reasonably long neck, small head and short tail, much like a reptilian seal," Kear says. 
The Opallionectes was 6 metres long, with masses of needle teeth used to trap small fish and squid.
Move over digital cameras. Imaging with special light-detecting fibres may be on its way.
It does this without lenses, filters or detector arrays typically used for the task.
Alternatively, interactive computer screens made with the fibres could respond to light instead of mouse clicks.
"We have shown already that these very simple fibre arrays can extract images without a lens," says Yoel Fink, an associate professor of materials science at MIT.
Fink, with postdoctoral associate Ayman Abouraddy and colleagues, publish the results in the latest issue of the journal Nature Materials.
Weaving the fibres together produces a screen-like product with unique coordinates for each location where two fibres intersect.
"The beauty of this is that they are able to make this three-dimensional detection and to do so with an object that is essentially transparent," says Malvin Teisch, professor of physics and electrical and computing engineering at Boston University.
A study published last year found that children with certain variations of that gene are particularly sensitive tasters, able to detect a very small amount of a bitter-tasting compound in water. 
A tasty sauce might make vegetables more palatable to a sensitive child, but dousing veggies with toppings may not be the most nutritionally sound choice, Tepper says. 
In nature, DNA's bases enable it to pair up with and attach to another strand of DNA to form a linear double helix.
"You can make lattices, you can make networks, you can make objects, you can make all sorts of things with branched DNA whereas with linear DNA you're just making a long line," he says.
While it is not possible to fly the aircraft by radio control from the ground, it is possible to communicate with the onboard computer system in an emergency.
So far the team has successfully tested a prototype that is 1.5 metres high with a 2.4-metre wingspan and weighs 30 kilograms.
Stone says UAVs are generally equipped with cameras and used for surveillance and reconnaissance.
Stone says his team is working with Australian technology company Sonacom to develop a commercial version of the aircraft for surveillance applications.
"We found a substantial delay in the time that it takes to restore the gut mucosal immune system in those with chronic infections," Dandekar says.
Dandekar's team has been studying HIV-infected patients who, even without treatment, have survived more than 10 years with healthy immune systems, including the T-cells that the virus attacks. 
"We looked at their gut lymphoid tissue and did not see loss of T-cells there. This correlated with better clinical outcomes," Dandekar says. 
So they started the current study, following 10 patients being treated with HAART, taking blood and gut samples before and after three years of treatment. 
The architecture of the worm's brain has more in common with a spider's brain than with the brains of other arthropods, researchers report in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences.
They found out that the worms are not a sister group of the arthropods, but lie within the arthropods and share a common ancestry.
"We found the [worms] did actually fall within the arthropods and are very similar to the chelicerates [spiders and scorpions]. The brains of the velvet worms looked strikingly like spider brains," Rowell says.
Australians will one-day come to terms with the need to drink recycled sewage, despite the recent decision of a Queensland town to veto it, experts say.
After passing through the filters the water would then have been treated with a combination of UV light and peroxide to "polish the water at a molecular level".
Bursill also says water workers would need to be specially trained and the regulatory system beefed up to cope with the new recycling technology.
The first half of the guidelines, dealing with recycled sewage for non-drinking purposes, is expected by September.
The second half, which will deal with a range of issues including recycled drinking water, is scheduled to be released for public consultation in the middle of next year.
The oceans are teeming with 10 to 100 more types of bacteria than previously believed, many of them unknown to science, according to a new study.
The risk of a miscarriage appears to rise along with the father's age, regardless of how old the mother is, researchers report. 
Also, as with women, older fathers are more likely to have children with birth defects. 
"As child-bearing is increasingly delayed in Western societies, this study provides important information for people who are planning their families," write the researchers, led by Dr Karine Kleinhaus, who was with the Columbia University School of Public Health in New York at the time of the study. 
These women were compared with the more than 12,000 study participants who delivered a baby. 
Jupiter's Great Red Spot, with its smaller cousin Red Spot Junior, seen through a special filter that samples thermal radiation from deep in the cloud layer
This backs separate research that has failed to come up with a link between head size and intelligence, except in extreme congenital abnormalities.
And people who did possess the suspected 'smart' versions of the genes weren't necessarily the most intelligent or the ones with the biggest brains.
"Their findings [about a relation to brain size] were negative and they didn't find a relationship with two of the genes we were looking at," she says.
Researchers had expected that people with evolved versions of the gene would be smarter and have bigger heads, but were surprised to find this wasn't the case, Luciano says.
While brain size appears to be related to intelligence between species, this doesn't seem to be the case within a species, Groves says.
By measuring the length of these telomeres and comparing that with a known rate of shortening, the researchers hope to estimate a whale's age.
There are many hurdles to overcome, researchers admit. For instance no-one knows for certain whether all whales have telomeres that shorten with time. And not all skin flakes yield enough genetic material to analyse. Then the researchers have to calibrate their methods against whales of a known age.
At distances of tens of millions of miles, a few centimetres on Earth can make the difference between communicating with the spacecraft and losing contact altogether. 
"The accuracy would be orders of magnitude worse" without these wobble corrections, says Johnson. 
"Among the types of potential hazards that this food poses are the creation of compounds that are known to be associated with important diseases like diabetes, Alzheimer's, heart disease and cancer," says centre director Associate Professor Jack Heinemann.
Of 510 college students who were initially free of EBV, nearly half became infected with the virus over the next three years, with sexually active students being at greater risk.
Most adults worldwide are infected with EBV, which, after first infecting a person, remains dormant in the body for life.
The finding contradicts a prior theory that Maui's temples were built within a span of just a few decades around the year 1600.
Some researchers now think the temples were built over the course of 500 years, with construction cycles peaking during periods of significant political change.
Radiocarbon dating of charcoal from beneath the building foundations formed the basis of the new research. The charcoal remains were left behind after ancient builders cleared vegetation with controlled fires.
Contact with westerners
The first westerners arrived with British explorer Captain James Cook in 1778. When Christianity was introduced to the islands in 1820, most of the temples were destroyed or abandoned. Maui has some of the best remains, with more than 120 remaining sites.
Timothy Earle, a professor of anthropology at Northwestern University, agrees with the conclusions of the new study, which he says "involved the broadest set of carbon dates. They appear to be good and valid."
"To fight a war properly you must always be able to identify somebody who is responsible for the deaths that ensue," says Sparrow, who is also with the Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics at the University of Melbourne.
"If you are using RFID [to track] cows, who cares?" Rieback asks. "But with a passport, it only takes one breach at the wrong time and it could wreck it for the RFID industry." 
RFID tags consist of a computer chips wrapped with tiny radio antennas. The chips store financial, identity, or other data that can then be sent to scanners by radio signals. 
Smart chips are being put into passports. Stores have experimented with using the tags not only to track inventory, but to bill shoppers for purchases invisibly as they leave.
"We are also showing it is possible to read completely hidden texts in ancient documents without harming them," Bergmann adds.
"Although we were very pleased to have actually been the first, it did cast a huge shadow over the whole field and every paper submitted now has to be backed up with endless evidence," he says.
He says the University of Newcastle upon Tyne has formed an alliance with Melbourne's Monash University to work on embryonic stem cell research.
Canada geese fall sick when they eat designer grass laced with fungus
Chris Pennell and his colleagues at Ag Research New Zealand have been working on particular types of fungi that co-exist with grass.
By choosing the right combination of endophyte and grass, the researchers hope to produce turf with unique properties.
Over the past two decades, he and his colleagues have been working to find the right combinations of grass and fungus to offer the benefits without the toxic side-effects.
The idea is that for airports, planting grass that keeps insects and birds away could help reduce dangerous birdstrikes where our feathered friends collide with aircraft.
"It won't solve all the problems with birds around airports, but it'll be a part of the overall bird management armoury," he says. "There is a lot of interest from airport companies around the world." 
People who are unhappy with their own body are likely to think celebrities are thinner then they really are, new Australian research shows.
The study is more evidence that being dissatisfied with your body is likely to distort your perception of other people's bodies. 
People who were satisfied with their body were more realistic and accurate in judging celebrities' actual sizes.
"The research suggests that if people are not satisfied with their own body, it may lead them to distort their perceptions of others' bodies, and forge unrealistic attitudes towards ideal body sizes, setting themselves up for an increased risk of eating disorders, low self-esteem and depression," Willinge says.
Prolonged ultrasound scans of the brains of foetal mice interfered with a process known as neuronal migration in which neurones move from one place to another, the team at Yale University reports. 
Data will also be collected from indigenous Australians, although this will be done under a separate umbrella with indigenous input.
Palmer says Western Australia is well suited to this kind of study because it's an isolated yet outbred population with a relatively low migration rate and historically large families.
Palmer says the rising incidence of chronic disease together with an increasingly unsustainable health system and the growth of new tools and technology has made the project not only possible but necessary.
He says national privacy legislation and beefed up genetic data protection laws, in line with the recommendation of the Australian Law Reform Commission's Essentially Yours report, will ensure privacy is safeguarded.
"When reported, however ... the category most frequently reported was within the context of the family itself, follow by doctors, genetic clinicians, researchers and insurers."
"So in the family context, people may feel coerced just because they want to help establish the risks of other people in the family without necessarily other family members applying pressure."
University of Sydney PhD student Gwilym Haynes has been working with the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries and CSIRO to sample carp from every major river in the Murray-Darling basin, as well as coastal rivers, and from Japan, Russia and Germany.
Haynes' research suggests the Boolarra strain bred with existing koi, or Japanese carp, from earlier releases and began their colonisation of the southeastern waterways.
"It implies that the carp were probably well adapted when they got to Australia and didn't need to breed with the other Australians to do well."
"There is significant genetic differentiation within regions in Australia, and this has implications for carp management," he says.
"[But] without a telescope it will never look much bigger than an ordinary star."
"It's actually much more spectacular than Mars because it is bright and easy for them to find and, with good binoculars, they can see the planet with four of its moons," she says.
"I realise that violence is an issue to us, but there are very common factors as well with violence which are not really related to race." 
Lea, a genetic epidemiologist at the Institute of Environmental Science and Research in Wellington, says that Maori men have an over-representation of monoamine oxidase, dubbed the warrior gene, which is associated with aggressive behaviour. 
He told New Zealand's National Radio that the gene appeared to feature in about 60% of Maori men compared with 30% men of European descent. 
Scientists have been speculating about the demise of the Y chromosome for some years now but Professor Jenny Graves of the Australian National University in Canberra has come up with a bold new twist on the theory.
But this could mean men without Y chromosomes would split off from those with, eventually evolving into a new species of hominid.
Graves says men without a Y chromosome would be largely infertile. But a small number would reproduce and pass the new sex determining gene to their children.
Eventually the group with the new gene would separate from the Y gene group, potentially evolving into a new species, she says.
"[The two groups] couldn't mate with each other so they'd get gradually different, just like chimpanzees and humans gradually became different 5 million years ago," she says.
"When two populations become two species there's generally there's some sort of wedge driven between them so they can't mate with each other.
This will occur because unlike the other coupled genes, the single Y chromosome can't recombine with a matching partner and is less able to refresh itself.
Australian researcher Professor Andrew Sinclair, of Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, is researching so-called XX men, or the roughly one in 150,000 men who are born without a Y chromosome.
"I don't know about a whole new species of human but if you lost the Y chromosome completely males would have to evolve in some way to deal with it," he says.
"If you have males without a Y chromosome I don't think I'd go as far as calling them a new species, but a new type of individual."
"The models predict that Antarctic snowfall should be increasing with a warming atmosphere," says Australian team member and palaeoclimatologist Dr Ian Goodwin, of the University of Newcastle.
"The best analogy is with a medical CT scan ... but at 2-3000 times the resolution," Donoghue says.
"We can look at any and every part of the fossil, inside and out, without harming it and then virtually dissect it however we like."
Dogs can 'catch' cancer by having sex with infected dogs, or perhaps by licking, biting or sniffing them, UK researchers show.
The researchers studied unrelated dogs worldwide with the canine transmissible venereal tumour (CTVT), also known as Sticker's sarcoma.
She found the same chromosome types in tumours from both males and females. And she found a devil that was born with a chromosomal abnormality did not have that abnormality in its tumour cells.
Along with information in Monet's letters to his wife, the results revealed that Monet painted his Parliament pictures all in the afternoon, between 14 February and 24 March 1900.
"The Victorian fogs tended to be associated with industry, employment and wealth to the minds of Londoners at that time. Air quality and health-related issues tended to be neglected," Baker says.
"There's a problem with the homogenisation of the world's biota where places such as harbours and bays are becoming more and more similar to each other," says Johnston.
Johnston is now teaming up with the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) to study the effect of pollution from Antarctic bases on marine organisms.
Such mundane items as nail polish remover, disinfectants and hair colouring contain chemicals that can be combined to make an explosion and are not detectable by "sniffing" machines, which detect plastic explosives but are not used with all baggage. 
"I stress identical with the explosives in liquids, which appear to be assembled on the plane," Ensalaco says.
Current airport security typically involves a five-layered process of screening checked-in luggage, with multiple x-rays and CT scans. 
Instead travellers pass through a metal detector gateway and their bags through an x-ray machine, with a random sample also checked for explosives residue using trace particle detectors. 
"It's something which I would imagine could only be solved with either sniffer dogs or electronic sniffers and hand searching. It's a very significant undertaking to do that at somewhere like Heathrow Airport," says David Claridge, managing director of Janusian Security Risk Management in London. 
Its scanner, with a traffic-light display to indicate all-clear, further investigation or danger, has already been trialled internationally, including at Manchester Airport. 
An al Qaeda plot to blow up airliners with liquid explosives was uncovered as far back as 1995.
Though police have given no further details, security analysts say there were indications they were concerned about militants setting off a liquid explosive such as nitroglycerine with some form of non-metal detonator, or combining otherwise harmless liquids on board a plane to produce an explosive mix. 
Is this embryo destined to develop into a woman with breast cancer? Image: iStockphoto)
A woman with a family history of breast cancer, or who carries the BRCA mutation, can ensure her baby doesn't inherit it by undergoing IVF to create an embryo and testing that embryo before implantation.
Early results have been encouraging, staff say, with a 50% increase in grain yields on research station trials and on farmers' fields.
Food insecurity is a major issue in East Timor. It affects an estimated 64% of the population, with many rural households experiencing food shortages from November to February.
Food insecurity is partly the result of low levels of food production, a consequence of poor land and the generally low levels of technology, combined with high crop losses, both pre- and post-harvest. 
SoL's work is a mix of research training, trialling with farmers, setting up research stations and applying social/economic research.
Frozen sperm is now preserved with cryoprotectants, substances that protect it from freezing damage. But defrosted sperm cannot always fertilise an egg.
An electronic teddy bear inspired by therapeutic companion animals could offer hospital and nursing home patients a meaningful form of treatment without the worry of allergies, bites or maintenance.
It will be loaded with full-body sensors, motors, microphones, a video camera, software and wireless communication technology to produce an engaging response to humans.
"We are designing the Huggable to be much more than a fun, interactive robotic companion, but rather to function as a team member that works with both the patient or resident and the hospital or nursing home staff with the ultimate goal of promoting the wellbeing of the person," says Walter Dan Stiehl, a PhD candidate at MIT and the team leader for the project.
The technology will be designed to work with a separate computer located at a nurse's station, where video, audio, or other data collected by the bear's sensors could alert caregivers in times of potential crisis.
The researchers then compared the results with a group of people who weren't frightened of blushing who performed the same tasks.
If the research helps people come to terms with that it could help them lose their fear of blushing, he says.
"Ultimately you're dealing with human ingenuity [and] you're fighting a moving target and need to be able to adapt," says Cebis, chief executive officer of Western Australia's Embedded Technologies.
"If you can understand how insects sense and act upon various volatile chemicals you'd hopefully be able to mimic that with electronic devices," he says.
"The research challenge is to make cheap, sensitive, ubiquitous sensors coupled with smart surveillance technology."
It measures the strength of the current as it changes with the electrical conductivity of different rock types.
The solar system may soon be home to a dozen planets, with three new additions to the club and more to come, if astronomers approve a new definition of a planet.
The proposed new definition of a planet would result in a 12-planet solar system with eight classical planets; three plutons, a new growing category of Pluto-like objects, including Pluto, 2003 UB313 (dubbed Xena) and Charon; and Ceres, a former asteroid.
"Had astronomers realised in 1930 that Pluto was smaller than our Moon and with a mass well under 1% that of the Earth, perhaps some special designation would have been devised for it," say Professor Owen Gingerich, head of the IAU committee that came up with the proposed definition.
Since it was founded in 1919, the IAU has been the arbiter in astronomical debates and after two years of work a committee has come up with a new planet definition to present to some 2500 astronomers gathered in the Czech capital. 
The process starts with a little dry wind in a dusty, arid place that kicks up small dust grains so they collide with larger sand grains, Kok explains.
Kok says he's already working on a new laboratory experiment with Mars-like conditions to see if electrical fields may be at work on the Red Planet.
All but one of the birds with the severed trigeminal nerve were home the next day, suggesting that the ability to detect magnetic fields is not used to navigate. Among the control group, only one pigeon was lost.
A new paper has inflamed the debate over the hobbit's origins, with one researcher criticising the scientific journal that published the research.
"It happens to be an individual [human] with major, probably genetic, deformities."
Thorne says the team reached its conclusions by comparing 140 anatomical features of the hobbit specimens with those of human specimens.
Thorne says previous comparisons of the hobbit had been with inappropriate western European populations.
The PNAS article states that the researchers were permitted to study the hobbit materials in accordance with a research agreement between the Indonesian National Research Centre of Archaeology and the University of New England.
It was removed without the agreement of both parties and without any conditions for proper credit, says Morwood.
"Our models of the chemical evolution of the Milky Way will have to be revised significantly," says astrophysicist Professor Jeffrey Linsky with the University of Colorado at Boulder.
All the deuterium that ever existed was believed to have been forged within a few minutes of the Big Bang 13.7 billion years ago. 
Associate Professor Brian Fields, with the University of Illinois in Urbana says:
She says studies in lab rats show that the best way to induce neurosis is to engender a sense of perpetual threat without a way of avoiding it.
In a single experiment, feral pigs killed 96% of radio-tracked turtles in a monitored area within a three-month period.
Not only would Indigenous communities lose a valuable source of bush tucker, but with it the strong cultural ties they have with the turtle.
Visualise, for instance, a cosmic million-kilometre per hour collision between two vast dollops of porridge with raisins in it. 
The raisins would shoot through with few direct raisin-on-raisin hits, while the oats would get stuck in a patch in the middle.
The result is different patches of space: one with lots of hot colliding gas and two others on either side with all the dark matter and stars in visible galaxies.
The astrophysicists know the visible stars still have the dark matter with them because they weighed the mass in the starry patches by measuring how those patches bend the light from far more distant objects. The more a starry region bends light, the more massive it is.
The discovery was made using a suite of observations from the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory, along with the ground-based European Southern Observatory Very Large Telescope and the Magellan Telescope.
It appears that dark matter particles, whatever they are, behave more like the raisins than the oats; they are either widely spaced, like stars, or have some other way of avoiding collisions with each other.
"We are doing a project to correlate the presence of certain species of fungi in coffee with coffee flavour," she says.
Some of the flavours associated with moulds included floral, citric, caramel, chocolate and toast.
The fungi occur naturally inside the coffee been and are associated with regional characteristics caused by soil, climate and humidity.
But it may be possible to use the knowledge to produce ranges of coffee with a particular flavour, potentially complementing the traditional bottles of vanilla or hazelnut flavourings found at your local cafe.
Hayes says the cells tend to be more sensitive to toxins than a functioning lung but the in vitro effects of the toxins on the cells tally well with effects observed in animals.
Tao, aged just 31, wins the medal with Russian recluse Dr Grigory Perelman, Frenchman Professor Wendelin Werner and Russian Professor Andrei Okunkov. 
Professor John Garnett, former UCLA college chair of mathematics, recently placed Tao on a level with Mozart, "except without Mozart's personality problems".
Meanwhile Perelman, the Russian mathematician who won the medal with Tao, declined to attend the ceremony, choosing instead to stay at home and watch television.
Perelman resigned from the Steklov Mathematics Institute suddenly in January without explanation.
There may be remnants of Neanderthal genes in the nuclear DNA of people with European ancestors
"Instead of a population that left Africa 100,000 years ago and replaced all other archaic human groups, we propose that this population interacted with another population that had been in Europe for much longer, maybe 400,000 years," says Vincent Plagnol.
They looked at people from Utah with ancestors from Northern and Western Europe and Yoruba people from West Africa.
Using statistics and computer modelling, the researchers focused on linkage 'disequilibriums', or sections within genes that did not make sense if only modern human matings are considered.
"We found that a simple model cannot explain the data if we do not add an 'ancestral population'. If this population did not cross with modern humans, or almost did not, the effect is too small to explain the data. We find that a rate of 5% is what is needed to explain what we see."
The researchers agree with recent studies that conclude Neanderthals did not contribute any mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA, genetic material that is passed from mothers to children. 
But they say other portions of the European genome, such as those associated with nuclear DNA, may still harbour the Neanderthal imprint.
Neanderthals are believed to have originated in Africa around 400,000 years ago, but they left and then settled in Europe, hence the apparent lack of interaction with modern humans in Africa.
New technologies are being developed to sequence nuclear DNA from fossils, so in the near future, scientists may learn more about how modern human genes compare with those of archaic humans, like Neanderthals.
A US biotechnology company says it has developed a way to make human embryonic stem cells without destroying the original embryo.
"It is possible to generate stem cells without destroying the embryo and without destroying its potential for life," says Dr Robert Lanza, chief scientist at Advanced Cell Technology in Massachusetts. 
Lanza's team used a method already used in fertility treatments to remove one cell from a human embryo without harming it. The scientists then grew stem cells from that single cell.
Although the source embryos were not then implanted in a woman, the scientists say they could have been, with the potential to develop normally. 
Alternatively, the atmosphere could have contained oxygen as early as 3.8 billion years ago and that sulfur usually associated with no oxygen might have been produced at a time of violent volcanic activity.
"For example, sexual jealousy would be an extremely powerful motivator in the wild state. Jealousy would also relate to position in hierarchy and alliances between animals within a pack."
All the animals received high scores for secondary emotions, with over 80% of owners saying their dogs showed signs of jealousy.
Morris also studied the phenomenon directly with his own two dogs, Silver and Jessie. He went out of his way to shower Silver with attention, and then only occasionally gave Jessie her usual pat on the head.
Marc Bekoff, a professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Colorado, is the author of numerous studies and books on animal emotions, most recently two books co-authored with primate researcher Dr Jane Goodall. He agrees with the new findings.
They decorate their bowers with colourful objects and are known to steal decorations from each other.
Top of the list were tail feathers from the crimson rosella bird and plastic bottle tops lined with dark blue plastic.
Karkanas came to this conclusion after studying objects uncovered within the caves and after performing a detailed microanalysis of the cave sediments.
Cereal husks and residue found within the dung indicates the cave dwellers probably farmed the land in front of the caves.
The dark, back 'room', measuring about 150 square metres, appears to have been the main area of habitation. Evidence for hearth fires was found. And the floor was plastered with a mixture of burnt dung and red clay.
Nine human burials discovered within the caves suggests some people may have lived their entire lives at the site.
"What they did was scientifically ludicrous and publicly embarrassing," he says. "Pluto is a planet with clouds, weather and geology." 
The large asteroid Ceres, along with Pluto and Xena, will also be defined as a dwarf planet. This is, according to the IAU, an important new class of trans-Neptunian objects. 
Tombaugh's announcement smashed the perceived boundaries of the solar system, established 84 years earlier with the discovery of Neptune.
This week's Prague vote will have similarly widespread public implications with models and textbooks of the solar system becoming instantly obsolete.
Torres Strait Islanders with diabetes may be placing their kidneys under further strain by eating dugongs contaminated with cadmium
This may be an issue, she says, as there is some suggestion that the kidneys of people with diabetes are more sensitive to being damaged by cadmium.
The digitiser could one day input information without a keyboard; come in handy for gaming, where it could imitate squeezing a trigger; and be worn to paint on a screen by moving a finger through the air.
The duo's device is equipped with three sensors to give it a broad range of function.
So in order to walk, we apply a backward force on the floor with our feet, propelling the feet up and us forwards.
Sharp drops in temperature are also associated with the arrival of a ghost.
In a room with a high window or a door with a gap, the cool air from outside displaces warm air inside, creating a system of heat cycles and eddies.
After n months there would be 2 x 2 x 2 ... x 2 = 2^n, or a geometric progression with ratio 2.
Radiocarbon dating suggests they relocated from their coastal rock shelters to inland fortresses about 300 years after arriving and about 150 years before the first contact with Europeans in 1790.
The researchers say that parts of China and India would have 12-15% more men over the next 20 years, many of them in rural areas and with a limited education.
"The growing number of young men with a lack of family prospects will have little outlet for sexual energy," write Dr Zhu Wei Xing of China's Zhejian Normal University and Dr Therese Hesketh of the Institute of Child Health at University College London. 
Freeland says there are plenty of laws and treaties dealing with what we can and can't do in space. 
That's equivalent to 10 Superdomes packed tight with dirt, each year, says Denise Reed, professor of geology and geophysics at the University of New Orleans, who has been working on finding solutions for the coast.
What this means, says Twilley, is that for the first time protection, which usually means buildings, is being integrated with restoration, which usually refers to coastal wetlands.
The CPR Authority's first daunting task is to work with the various levee boards and the federal government to craft a comprehensive protection and restoration plan for the Louisiana coast.
In April, Twilley's LSU colleague Professor Roy Dokka came out with a paper in Geology, in which he argued that faulting and what looks like a gigantic, slow-moving regional landslide is the cause of almost three-quarters of New Orleans' subsidence.
T&ouml;rnqvist surveyed long-buried wetland peat layers in outlying areas to come up with entirely different and milder subsidence rates.
The scientists say the ozone layer's comeback is due in large part to compliance with the 1987 international Montreal Protocol, which aimed to limit emissions of ozone-depleting chemicals.
GRBs have long been associated with the aftermath of supernovae.
The remains of a supernova can become a neutron star, a fast-rotating star that pulses with high energy.
A leaf is about 30-40% efficient at converting light to electricity and this compares with just a 12% efficiency for conventional silicon-based solar cells.
In 1986, Harvard School of Public Health doctors recruited 670 men aged 45-86, with the average age of 62.
Every point increase in hostility was associated with a loss of 9 millilitres in the air expulsion test.
Previous research has linked hostility and anger with heart disease, asthma, hypertension, irritable bowel syndrome and other disorders, although the exact causes are unclear. 
Some women with normal pregnancies have caesareans as a matter of choice
"This study shows that caesarean delivery is associated with a three-fold increase in the risk of postpartum maternal death as compared with vaginal delivery," the researchers say.
And some professionals have recently proposed elective caesarean delivery should be an acceptable first-choice method of delivery for women with normal pregnancy, say Deneux-Tharaux and colleagues.
Could tinkering with the DNA of immune cells be a cure for deadly cancers?
Two out of 17 patients with a deadly form of skin cancer have had their tumours wiped out by genetically altered immune cells, US researchers report.
The researchers infused 17 patients suffering from metastatic melanoma with their own white blood cells that had been removed and genetically engineered to fight tumours. 
The patients' T-cells had been modified with genes that code for receptors designed to recognise melanoma cells.
One experiment cured two French "bubble boys" with a rare immune disorder, but later gave them leukaemia, and an 18-year-old died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment. 
It was administered with the drug interleukin-2, which can cause fluid retention, he says.
Over the past three years, operating with a full-time staff of just seven and a total budget equivalent to US$151 million dollars, the little probe has been testing new technology that one day could help put humans on Mars. 
Scientists also say that the 20,000 detailed photos transmitted by the craft will yield a fresh look at the Moon, revealing Earth's satellite as a place of surprising complexity and promise rather than a lifeless rock with little to offer except grey dust. 
The engine type has only been used once before, with the US craft Deep Space 1, launched in 1998 to rendezvous with an asteroid and then a comet. 
It had to loop again and again around the Earth to gain extra speed yet also juggle with the Moon's gravitational tug, all the time using a tiny engine that delivered the same power as someone picking up an A4 sheet of paper. 
The researchers then compared this information with the health, weight, personality and other data.
Computer models matched these traits with relatedness to find how much of each trait appeared to be affected by genetics.
In his study Levine put lean and fat people into underwear with built-in sensors that gauged their movement through the day.
A wide variety of food helps brushtail possums eat and eat, without overloading their bodies with toxins
Unlike humans, who can pig out on chocolate or hot chips until we make ourselves sick, possums know exactly when they're starting to overload their system with toxins, says researcher Dr Karen Marsh of the Australian National University.
She then offered the possums a range of foods with similar toxin pathways and a range of foods with different pathways.
For example, one synaesthete described a Kandinsky painting as having "a huge splurge of sound ... booming and vulgar", "a mousy little meee sound that translates into 'ohs' and 'ahs'" and shapes that "pop up laughing with a 'whooo'".
He hypothesised that most people would be able to link an image by someone with synaesthesia to a particular piece of music upon which the image was based.
A control group without synaesthesia did the same and a professional artist created animations of the images related to the music.
In death as in life, iconic TV naturalist Steve Irwin captivated millions worldwide and clogged the internet as fans from around the world reacted with disbelief to news the Crocodile Hunter was dead.
Some websites groaned to a halt within hours of the first reports on Monday that Irwin had been killed by a stingray's barb through his chest in a freak diving accident off Australia's northeast coast.
Australian news websites struggled to keep up with demand. 
It resumed soon after in a low-bandwidth format to cope with hundreds of thousands of hits. 
Newspaper websites also wobbled but kept up with demand. 
A spokesperson for the Sydney Morning Herald says its website experienced a 40% spike in page impressions compared with the previous week's average weekday number of about 500,000. 
That pattern was mirrored around the world, with Irwin's death leading major news websites such as CNN and US and UK newspaper websites, as well as swamping their 'most viewed' and 'most emailed' categories.
Blogs and internet feedback pages were also awash with postings from shocked readers from around the world, many of them from Americans charmed by Irwin's quirky style and his catchphrase "crikey".
A snapshot within a proton showing a strange quark (red) and its antistrange partner (yellow) together with two up quarks (blue) and a down quark (green)
"People have been playing around with these problems for 10 years or more."
By combining results from real-life experiments with simulations, the Adelaide team, with collaborators at the University of Edinburgh and the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility in the US, says it has calculated the strange contribution with unprecedented accuracy.
The research brought together expertise in supercomputing with techniques in a branch of physics called Effective Field Theory, Leinweber says.
The project, carried out with palaeontologist Dr Carole Burrow from the University of Queensland, was the first use of x-ray microtomography to investigate small vertebrate fossils.
The researchers sought to investigate the role of MMOs, in which players inhabit 'avatars' or on-screen representations of characters within virtual worlds and chat with other players by text or voice, in players' social lives. 
Steinkuehler and Williams conclude that the games helped players gather a type of social capital known as bridging, which involves making informal connections with others, while they didn't generally help people build stronger social bonds.
In each instance, an adult male, often the alpha male named Yolo, would stand at the edge of the road. He then would carefully look left and right, then motion with an arm.
At that point, the other chimps formed themselves into an ordered line and followed behind. The order nearly always consisted of adult males first with females, juveniles and the infant second. The leader, or another adult male, would then wait at the end of the line to assist the littlest ones.
The pygmy goby's record-breaking status was confirmed this week by Guinness World Records. Not only is it the fastest living fish, it has the shortest life span of any creature with a backbone known to science.
They then mature within two weeks and have a maximum adult lifespan of just three and a half weeks, says Professor David Bellwood from James Cook University and ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies.
During their three-weeks of sexual maturity, the fish produce just three clutches of eggs. To help ensure they survive, the male goby stands guard, fanning the eggs with his fins while they are incubating.
"If this patient is actually conscious, why wouldn't she be able to engage in intentional overt motor acts, given that she had not suffered functional or structural lesion of the motor pathways?" asks Dr Lionel Naccache of France's INSERM research institute in a commentary published with the report. 
"As a healthy sceptic I'd say 'interesting theory' but why didn't they smell [the gas]? Because it's pretty disgusting," says forensic pathologist Dr Christopher Lawrence who is with the Tasmanian health department.
He says while hydrogen sulfide could discolour the blood by interacting with haemoglobin any blood tests would needed to have been carried out very shortly after the deaths.
We generally think of grief as being associated with the loss of people we're very close to, like a family member, says psychologist Grant Brecht, of the Australian Psychological Society.
"We can experience grief almost at the same level as we may well do with a family member," says Brecht.
"People would have felt an affinity with Steve," he says. "He was a bit of an Australian icon, a bit of an Australian larrikin, someone who seemed to have quite an affinity with animals, which most of us would respect."
Brecht says the mourning is a healthy part of dealing with the feeling of loss.
The suppression of grief was also helped by a decline in religious ritual and by a period of major wars in which soldiers, and by implication all of us, were expected to bear death with stoicism, says Jalland.
The study involved 18 people infected with H5N1 and eight with human flu in 2004 and 2005 in Vietnam.
Scientists found far higher viral loads in the nose and throats of those infected with bird flu than human flu. 
Thirteen of those infected with H5N1 died and the virus was found in the blood of at least nine of them, suggesting it could have been transported out of the respiratory tract. 
The virus was also found in the rectums of most of those with H5N1, suggesting it could have spread through the blood stream into the gastrointestinal tract. 
Those with common flu had no virus in their blood or rectum. No one died in that group. 
"The fatal outcome of H5N1 infections seems to be associated with high levels of replication of the virus and also the detection of the virus in the blood," says de Jong. 
Martin says the findings of the study show that conventional methods of handling young graffiti offenders, such as dealing with them under the legal system, are doomed to failure.
But he says the good news is that with intensive individual, family and community therapy it's possible to put people back on track.
"Graffiti may be one gateway into working with young people to assist them to find a new direction," he says.
"It may be extending their creative skills or just sitting down with them and saying, listen you've had a bit of a shit life haven't you?"
"The average kindergarten teacher will tell you, I don't like that child, I can't work with them, they spit at me, they spit at the other kids, they hit people, they won't learn.
"You can certainly predict which ones will go on to antisocial behaviour, and within that graffiti is going to be one of the things that stands out."
Can't decide which soft drink to buy? Help may be at hand with a new drinks bottle that has flavour buttons to give you multiple choices in one container.
The concept came from software that Woolf invented, called Innovation Engine, which pulls knowledge from databases to systematically help the user improve an existing product or come up with a new idea.
"Any child looking at that bottle will want to play with the buttons," she says, pointing out that if the bottle is used for sugary soft drinks, it has the potential for luring kids into seeing junk food as something to play with.
This mathematical puzzle involves filling in a grid of 81 squares with varying combinations of the numbers one to nine, something that sounds simple but can be diabolically hard.
But every time we put the right number in the right place it provides us with a clue, which reduces the number of permutations.
Not breathing while training with weights can increase the pressure on your eyes, potentially leading to glaucoma
According to the findings, 90% of subjects had an increase in eye pressure when they didn't exhale while doing the bench presses, compared with 62% who did.
Glaucoma is a condition associated with pressure on the eye. The pressure slowly destroys the optic nerve at the back of the eye, causing vision impairment and possible blindness.
It's also more common among people who play high-resistance wind instruments or those with asthma or intestinal or urinary tract blockages.
"Intermittent intraocular pressure increases during weightlifting should be suspected in patients with normal tension glaucoma who perform such exercises," the authors conclude.
Computer-generated image of TrES-2 as seen from the night side, with its host star in the distance
The astronomers also had to rule out other possible explanations for the dimming, such as a partner star gravitationally locked in orbit with the target star, called GSC 03549-02811 and located in the constellation Draco.
Three of the densest sections of plasma were located directly above areas with frequent thunderstorms: the Amazon Basin in South America, the Congo Basin in Africa, and Indonesia.
Researchers now hope to determine if the plasma bands shift with the seasons, or during large events like hurricanes.
The battle over fragments taken from Greece's Parthenon has resurfaced with the return of a small piece of the ancient monument by a German university.
The last Neanderthals holed up in Gibraltar, a refuge on the balmy southern tip of Europe, until their lineage withered away, scientists say
With Europe in the grip of an Ice Age and with their smarter cousins, Homo sapiens, spreading across the continent, the last Neanderthals holed up in a refuge on the balmy southern tip of Europe until their lineage withered away, the study says.
Co-existing with humans
How long Neanderthals and modern humans coexisted in the same geographical area is a subject of much debate, with some researchers suggesting it could have been as short as 2000 years. 
This adds weight to the argument that the last Neanderthals had only limited contact with H. sapiens, so interbreeding was unlikely.
The double-pulsar system put Einstein's theory of general relativity through its paces, with what's believed to be the most stringent test yet
According to results published online today in the journal Science, the 91-year-old theory came through with top marks.
What the scientists can say for certain is that Einstein's theory is accurate to at least within 0.05%.
It recommends the establishment of a dedicated office within a federal department that will be responsible for the nanotechnology strategy, although it does not recommend which portfolio this should fall under.
The celestial body now known as Eris with her moon Dysnomia
Unlike Pluto, its orbit does not cross paths with Neptune, the most distant full-sized planet. 
"It sounds like a disease. But in any case we all liked it," says Dr Ted Bowell, an astronomer at Lowell Observatory in Arizona who heads the division of the astronomers' union that deals with planets.
The disease has been found so far on four of the five large crocodile farms in the Northern Territory, says Jerrett, with two farms seriously affected.
For about US$5 per house, indoor spraying with DDT is a cost-effective response to malaria, says the WHO.
"The environmental impact associated with spraying insecticides, whether it's DDT or other insecticides, indoors is minimal, it's negligible ... This is as unrelated to Silent Spring as anything," Tren says. "The science is very clear that there are no harmful human effects."
She shares the award with Professor Carol Greider of Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore and Professor Jack Szostak of Harvard Medical School and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 
Professor Peter Terry of the University of Southern Queensland says technology like running shoes that increase the beat of music in time with a runner's pace and even implantable micro-mp3 players may one day give athletes the winning edge.
"In other words, if you play music with a fast tempo, people work harder."
Whitney Houston's One Moment in Time was a particular favourite with certain members of the Australian team during the Sydney Olympics who saw it as reflecting their personal goal to 'seize their moment'.
Terry says a computer company has already entered a deal with a sportswear manufacturer to produce an armband you can slip your mp3 player into.
Also in the pipeline are shoes with sensors that pick up how fast you're going and coordinate the beat of the music to ensure you maintain the pace.
He also says being able to download music has made it easier for athletes to come up with music that's highly personalised to their individual training and competing program.
The question of cheating may become even more fraught with the prospect of tiny mp3 players that can be worn under the skin.
Associate Professor Chris Mackie from the University of Melbourne says the survey will combine conventional mapping with electromagnetic surveying to produce the most comprehensive historical and archaeological study ever conducted there.
"One of the things we'll be spending a great deal of time on is the mapping of the trenches to see how they cohere with surviving maps of the trenches and exploring what lies beneath."
"Because we'll be using electromagnetics you're coming up with all sorts of possibilities, everything from material left behind in the battle itself to much older stuff."
Flares are usually associated with sunspots, dark cool areas caused by intense magnetic fields breaking through the Sun's surface.
They pose a danger to astronauts and spacecraft and can cause havoc with satellite links, power grids and mobile phone networks on Earth. 
"Solar flares are fast and furious. They can cause communication blackouts on Earth within 30 minutes of a flare erupting on the Sun's surface," says Harra. 
But molecular dating by Weston and colleagues at Rhodes University in South Africa has come up with some surprises when compared with geological data on continental drift.
"Not all of that skill is something you are born with, but there is a genetic component," Castles says.
A second finding is that reading and spelling have a common genetic basis, meaning that if children are having difficulty spelling they will also be likely to struggle with learning to read. 
"The existence of different reading sub-skills, with different genetic bases, needs to be reflected in our theories of reading and its acquisition," she says.
The stadium's jammed tunnels left many people in the open without protection. 
During the next 10 minutes there were 16 more lightning strikes within a mile of the stadium, says Gratz.
"When you go into a stadium as a spectator people have weather information on PDAs and cell phones, but no one is really going to notice with the bright lights and game that there is an electrical storm 15 miles away."
Gratz admits he has fallen prey to this blindness. He was at a game at Denver's Invesco Stadium when his father called his mobile phone and asked him why, if he was such a knowledgeable weather person, was he sitting out in the open at a stadium along with 50,000 other people when a nasty electrical storm was closing in?
It was a lush area with flowing water, forests and grassland, which was also affected by volcanic eruptions. The range of habitats was suitable for hippos, crocodiles and relatives of the wildebeest.
"Imagine a suitcase filled with billions of toxin-carrying flying robots that could be released anywhere to target a population," he says.
"If I can make my own car at home for a couple of hundred dollars with a design downloaded from the internet that means I'm not a customer of the auto dealer down the road."
"We need to be providing the best possible population data and we can't monitor them without knowing where they roost," says Shilton.
"There's this kind of love-hate relationship with fruit bats in Australia," says Shilton. 
"They do come into contact with fruit growers," says Shilton. "But they also come into conflict with people in urban environments."
"This particular species is the one with the smallest distribution and it is believed to have the smallest population," Shilton says.
To find out where the Queensland bats are, Shilton has asked the public to call her with information. Already, she says, there are sightings of flying foxes heading out for food in daylight, an unusual behaviour for the nocturnal animal. 
His team is developing a system in which porous concrete pavers allows run-off to seep into underground tanks made of galvanised metal or a flexible plastic lining filled with gravel.
A special bonding material ensures the porous pavers are strong enough to withstand the heavy weight of cars and trucks.
A paver injected with ferrous hydroxide, for example, traps toxic and persistent heavy metals like lead, zinc and cadmium that come from sources such as car tyres, brake-linings and exhaust.
And the pavers could be seeded with low maintenance native vegetation including sedges.
And a majority (58%) agreed with predictions that refuseniks will emerge as a cultural group characterised by their choice to live off the network and that some will resort to terror acts in protest against technology. 
A total of 35% of respondents disagreed with that scenario and 7% had no opinion.
The survey, which was conducted with North Carolina's Elon University, also found that a majority of internet leaders, activists and analysts questioned agree with predictions that by 2020:
"I come away with a sense that the future is still up for grabs, even as everyone agrees that it will be very different from today."
"Coal mining can release methane to the atmosphere without safeguards," Steele says.
Still, after several attempts, the High Resolution Stereo Camera on board ESA's Mars Express captured a series of images with a ground resolution of approximately 13.7 metres per pixel.
Garvin, for his part, doesn't want to discourage anyone from coming up with their own explanations.
"Please realise that as a scientist of Martian landscapes, my position is that of a traditional scientist, and requires that I utilise the paradigms associated with multiple-working hypotheses grounded in the physics of landscape development," he says.
Dogs like sports celebrities too. They watch other dogs 'play fight' then hang out with the winners
"I believe that within the context of a game, dogs prefer winners because they are likely to be a fun and effective partner with which to play," says lead author Dr Nicola Rooney.
"One plausible function of play is that it serves as a 'safe context' in which to test one's own competitive ability. An animal will learn more from playing with an able partner than with a lower quality one," adds Rooney, a researcher in the Anthrozoology Institute at the University of Bristol.
In an initial experiment, a dog was matched with a human competitor in a tug of war contest over a knotted rope toy. Each of the canine spectators was brought in on a leash to view matches.
For some games, the human competitor made it clear that he or she was playing by performing moves that dogs seem to associate with playtime. 
These include play bows, where the person gets down on all fours with their forequarters lowered and arms outstretched; forward lunges, where the individual makes sudden, yet non-threatening, movements toward the dog competitor; and feet shuffling, which involves rapid movement of the feet while in a standing position.
After such competitions, the spectator canine would rapidly approach the human or doggy winner with a cheerful gait holding its ears and tail up, signifying a desire to interact with the victor.
And after the catchphrase "beam me up Scotty", scientists have started to experiment with dematerialising and rematerialising helium, and 'cloning' laser beams.
What is significant, the scientists write, is that 2005 is in the same temperature range as 1998, and was among the warmest year ever on record, with no sign of the warm surface water in the eastern equatorial Pacific typical of an El Ni&ntilde;o.
Overall, Earth is within 1&deg;C of its highest temperature levels in the past million years, Hansen and the others write.
They note a recent steep rise in average temperatures, with global surface temperatures increasing about 0.2&deg;C for each of the past three decades. 
As part of a project with Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Germany's University of Hohenheim, Qutob and his colleagues will inject compounds from plants found in the occupied West Bank and often used as seasonings into food fed to newborn Nile tilapia fish. 
The 3D scans reveal that the woman with the enigmatic smile was originally painted with her hair tied back in a bun, even though today it appears loose on her shoulders.
The new images will allow curators to continue their research without touching the canvas, as well as try new restoration techniques on the 3D model before applying them to the actual portrait, says Taylor. 
The approach could change both how institutions deliver information to the public and how people interact with public and private businesses in their neighbourhood.
Casalegno's idea for the project began with the metaphor of an electronic lens that, when aimed at a building, could become a kind of viewfinder, making the institution more transparent.
For example, the manager of a movie theatre could stick the tag on the outside of the building, then take a picture of it with a mobile phone.
There could be a tag for each movie playing in the theatre, with each tag hosting a movie trailer with show times.
Viewers with the same software on their phone can access the tag and start a conversation thread with movie reviews.
"It's very convincing, this idea of connecting social networks with the mobile community," says Leda Guidi, head of the citizens' communication unit for the City of Bologna, Italy, who organised the country's first free municipal internet network.
Casalegno has already conducted a user study of 20 people in Spain and is now working on a new version of eLens to be tested by next year with 100 participants in Boston or Chicago.
"It is going to provide us with a whole new window on the universe," says SKA steering committee member Professor Brian Boyle from CSIRO.
The SKA telescope is not a single giant instrument but a set of thousands of antennas spread out in a spiral over 3000 kilometres with antennas at the centre closest together.
In Southern Africa, the core of the telescope would be sited in the Northern Cape region of South Africa with dishes extending to Botswana, Namibia, Mozambique, Madagascar, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana.
And a joint bid from Argentina and Brazil was eliminated because of turbulent ionospheric conditions above South America that would interfere with the low-frequency radio waves used by the SKA.
"We weren't trying to perform technical feats but to carry out a feasibility test ... Now we know that a human being can be operated on in space without too many difficulties," says team leader Dr Dominique Martin.
Strapped inside a custom-made operating block, three surgeons and two anaesthetists worked during these brief bursts, with their instruments held in place with magnets around the patient's stretcher. 
This experiment should take place within a year, Martin says. 
One is the use of thousands of tiny hairs that generate a weak electrical bond, using van der Waals forces, with the surface. Another is tiny claws that lock onto rough surfaces.
The team carried out its research with zebra tarantulas (Aphonopelma seemanni) from Costa Rica, which were induced to walk around a slick, vertical glass surface.
Gorb theorises that spiders may have started making silk with their feet before they began to do so with their spinnerets, as this would have helped their survival by avoiding catastrophic falls. 
The lead in the lead oxide had reacted with sulfur from the amino acids found in hair keratins, the scientists say, giving the black colour.
Dr Ivan Kempson, a materials scientist and research fellow at the University of South Australia, is impressed with the research.
But he says it is not yet clear how the sulfur in the keratin is made available to interact with the lead in the hair.
"If you know how they penetrate the hair and how they react within the hair then you can develop better cosmetic products," he says.
One day you might be greeted by a talking, thinking computer-animated face like this one when booking a ticket, or withdrawing money from the bank
The animated faces may replace the mouse, keyboard and the touch screen as the main way we interact with computers, say when booking tickets or withdrawing money from the bank.
"[But] what people really want with computers is that they actually understand what you're doing and know what you want and can interact with you a lot more effectively and naturally."
Burnham hopes his team's talking, thinking head will make our conversations with artifically intelligent machines more effective for two reasons.
He says such a head on a videophone could make automated directory assistance more effective at communicating with children, or people with accents or hearing disabilities.
It might also remember different individuals and personalise its interactions with them, and have appropriate emotional responses when the need arises, Burnham says.
The head might even "switch to sympathetic mode" when we get irate with it for not understanding us correctly.
Burnham says he plans to develop a head that is also able to learn from its interactions with different people and improve its communication.
Burnham says the project will initially explore two scenarios where the head might be useful: dealing with billing complaints and language tuition.
In their experiment, the scientists dabbed hairless mice with a solution containing the mite enzyme and observed that the rodents soon suffered water loss from their skins. 
They then dabbed the mice with riboflavin, or vitamin B2, which is accepted in the scientific community as a substitute for allergens and irritants in the environment.
"He came up with a graph showing the probability of having someone blink in a photograph," says Svenson. 
"Then he was able to do the reverse of that equation, as it were, to come up with the number of photographs to take."
The two found out that when you're taking photos of a group with fewer than 20 people you divide the number of people by three to get the number of shots you need to take.
The Ig Nobel prize for medicine went to the authors of case reports in medical journals on the 'Termination of intractable hiccups with digital rectal massage'.
Scientists say they have cloned mice from white blood cells with a similar technique used to create Dolly the sheep.
Only the fully mature granulocytes were able to produce two live cloned pups, although both died within a few hours of birth, the researchers report. 
"In fact, we repeated our experiments six times just to be sure. Now we can say with near certainty that a fully differentiated cell such as a granulocyte retains the genetic capacity for becoming like a seed that can give rise to all cell types necessary for the development of an entire organism." 
Rather, the emerging science of neuroanthropology suggests that brains within a group can be 'wired' by common experience, just as individual brains become 'wired' by individual experiences.
"You may have a distant relationship with your father [and] a closer relationship with your uncle," Dominguez says.
He'll test this by showing the subjects photographs of relations and monitoring their brain activity with magnetic resonance imaging.
These connections are influenced by repeated patterns of thought, emotional reinforcement and even the influence of chemicals associated with stress and pleasure on the brain.
"If you're hanging out with the hip-hop scene ... you're going to pick up patterns of thought, ways of thinking, expectations of other people's behaviour that are different from your next door neighbour who's a retired factory worker," he says.
"[Some] 50% of all fibres are from petroleum, and we have an oil issue," says Yiqi Yang, a professor of textile science at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, who is collaborating with doctoral candidate Narendra Reddy.
The straw is treated with a combination of chemicals, heat and enzymes, and washed repeatedly.
"If you can compete with current available products, you will have a chance."
They have focused on the thin, filamentous parts that form the fluffier parts of the feather. These parts have microscopic air pockets interlaced within a honeycomb architecture.
For example, she tells the joke about the prisoner who plays cards with his wardens. But the prisoner cheats, so they kick him out of prison.
"It's within the same concept but it's incongruous, it's the mismatch ... it's not the fact that you've fallen onto your backside."
"Research shows that if a mother crawls towards the edge of the cot the baby will laugh because it interferes with the convention that babies crawl, mothers walk," she says.
It also suggests that we respond to contextual mismatches without having to "get" the joke.
"Laughter offers a temporary respite from the everyday clutter of thought. It's a different sort of consciousness with is uncluttered by the everyday 'shoulds' and 'buts'," she says.
Hale believes laughter is a uniquely human talent that operates within a cultural context but also transcends culture.
Alnylam is working with Merck and Co, Medtronic, Novartis, Biogen Idec and the US government to develop RNAi to treat high cholesterol, respiratory syncytial virus, which can endanger infants, H5N1 avian influenza, the Ebola virus and some types of pain. 
Websites are changing the way musicians promote music and network with other artists
Musicians tend to hang out with artists who play in a different style rather than those from the same genre, an international study of online social networks has found.
The second group, or similarity network, includes artists who share an element of musical similarity, and puts Mick Jagger in with Tina Turner and David Bowie.
An analysis of the groups shows little correspondence between artists who play together and artists who make the same sort of music, suggesting that musicians are more likely to collaborate with others from different musical genres.
"There's no necessary relationship between the style of music you play and who you play music with," Burgess says.
"You might end up with a situation where everyone who's a female singer songwriter might get compared to Joni Mitchell [rather than] a lesser known artist who may be a closer comparison," he says.
"Rather than having a pre-defined ranking which says these singers are rock or alternative or classical ... the categories derive from a broad user base interacting with the data," he says.
"It's a democratic form of taxonomy which is more in tune with public perception."
The chemical reaction that thins ozone reaches its peak with colder high altitude temperatures in the southern hemisphere winter.
"Such significant ozone loss requires very low temperatures in the stratosphere combined with sunlight," says the agency's atmospheric engineer Dr Claus Zehner. 
Ozone in the stratosphere is protective. At ground level, though, ozone, as a chemical reaction between exhaust fumes and sunlight, is a pollutant that can be dangerous for people with bad respiratory or heart problems.
"I want to make sure that all of the major stakeholders, particularly the economic stakeholders are very happy with the process and we get what I call a win-win-win," he told ABC Radio.
A new type of paper made from nanowires withstands temperatures to 700&deg;C
To make the nanowires, the researchers first mix powdered titanium dioxide with an alkaline solution and place it in a teflon-coated container.
After the paper dries, it can be bent, folded or trimmed with scissors.
The finished product can withstand temperatures of 700&deg;C, which makes it flame-retardant. It also makes it possible to sanitise the paper with a torch flame or ultraviolet light.
"Understanding this process in more detail may provide researchers with the needed tools to develop new treatments for diseases." 
"The DNA double helix is a very beautiful structure but it is a challenge to deal with because all the information is inside," Berg says.
"This allows us to say with a high degree of confidence that there are billions of planets in our galaxy," says Dr Mario Livio, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore.
The newly discovered planets fit within that category, except they move even more quickly around their parent stars, which are smaller than the Sun. 
Using other tests, the team was able to say with certainty that "at least a large fraction of our candidates must be planets", Sahu says.
A dress with animated flowers on its neckline, shirt sleeves that make sounds in tune with your body language, and a hemline with a mind of its own have been developed by a Canadian researcher.
Berzowska's flowery dress, named Kukkia, has a neckline with felt and silk flowers that open and close according to a special electronics embedded in the dress.
Another dress with a mind of its own is Vilkas, which has a hemline that goes up and down on its own.
"One of them was this gigantic monster, with vertebrae the size of dinner plates and teeth the size of cucumbers," says Dr Joern Hurum, an assistant professor at the University of Oslo.
"We believe the skeleton is intact and that it's about 10 metres long," he says of the pliosaur, a type of plesiosaur with a short neck and massive skull. The team dubbed the specimen The Monster. 
Plesiosaurs, which swam with two sets of flippers, often preyed on smaller dolphin-like ichthyosaurs. All went extinct when the dinosaurs vanished 65 million years ago. 
Surprisingly, cereals with added dietary fibre had the highest furosine levels. 
Musicians can jam together by making gestures with their fingers in the air, says an Australian researcher.
Dr Alistair Riddell at the Australian National University has developed a system that allows groups of people to make music with a sensor system that translates finger movement into sound.
Riddell has already given performances with other musicians using the system.
While the idea of creating sound with gesture has been explored previously, Riddell's system is the first to enable more than one person to be involved.
"We shared the same computational space," he says of the peformances. "It wasn't like we were three musicians with three guitars, we were actually three musicians with one guitar."
"What you really saw were three people standing in front of you with their hands raised in front of them and they were bending their fingers," he says.
Riddell describes performing with the hand sensor system as enjoyable but very exposing, sometimes embarrassing and surprisingly physically demanding.
Kowm, the site where the remains were discovered along with flint and stone weapons, is a 20 kilometre-wide gap between two mountain ranges that had a number of springs.
An active galaxy with a supermassive black hole near its centre spewing out matter across the cosmos
Our cosmic neighbourhood is flush with supermassive black holes busily devouring nearby stars and other matter, say scientists who have unveiled the first complete census of black hole activity in the local universe.
The survey, which took nine months of observations with NASA's Swift satellite, was presented at a recent American Astronomical Society meeting in San Francisco.
The survey uncovered more than 200 supermassive black holes within 400 million light-years of Earth, says Dr Jack Tueller with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.
"It's hard to believe the whole sky is peppered with black holes," says University of Maryland researcher Dr Craig Markwardt.
"You can't understand the universe without understanding black holes," says Dr Richard Mushotzky, also with NASA's Goddard centre.
"Black hole jets are one of the great paradoxes in astronomy," says NASA's Dr Rita Sambruna, also with Goddard.
"The analysis is complicated because the energy that radiates out is weak compared with the subterranean background noise picked up by detectors. You really have to make a very detailed analysis when you look into such an event." 
A third monitoring technique is to use satellites with ground-scanning radars, which record the topography of a test site before and after an event. 
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and the University of Hong Kong have developed a liquid composed of small protein fragments that can stop bleeding in wounded rodents within seconds.
Doctors currently have few effective methods to stop bleeding without causing other damage. Current tools include clamps, pressure, cauterisation and sponges.
The researchers do not know exactly how the solution works. But they suspect that the peptides interact with the extracellular matrix around the cells rather than inducing clotting.
But with the high resolution of the European Southern Observatory's Very Large Telescope, Wilkinson measured the velocities of stars in several extremely faint dwarf galaxies orbiting Andromeda to determine the mass of its dark halo.
"But reducing the uncertainties on mass is important for understanding the history of the local group and will help us better understand how it compares with other groups of galaxies."
"My laptop battery now runs my computer for about three hours before recharging. A microengine power system, engine plus fuel, with the same weight as the battery should run the laptop for 15 to 20 hours before refuelling," says Epstein.
They etch out the parts from wafers of silicon. The etching requires incredible accuracy with little or no room for error.
But if they can find a way to insulate the combustor from the other components, a final working product would be about the size of a cigarette lighter, with the engine on top and the fuel below.
Now the team has to add fuel and demonstrate a working engine, something Epstein thinks can be accomplished within the next 12 months.
Scientists have used computers to analyse how Shakespeare used certain words and phrases and have come up with a unique linguistic signature
Kinney leads the research with Australia's Professor Hugh Craig, director of the Centre for Literary and Linguistic Computing at the University of Newcastle.
A computational fingerprint is created from known works and then compared with the fingerprints of unknown works to see if there is a match.
Hole says nuclear fusion would produce energy at a cost comparable to nuclear fission but with an environmental impact comparable to wind power.
Currently, Hole says only A$1.3 million is spent on fusion research in Australia and this should be increased to A$16 million to be competitive with the US and UK commitment.
Diesendorf says while there could be a big pay-off from fusion, the technology is very risky, with the chance of plasma becoming more unstable the more energy you try to get out of the system.
But other national monitors put it at less than 1 kilotonne, with one figure as little as 200 tonnes.
Such low yields are feasible with a nuclear warhead, but they are traditionally reserved for established members of the nuclear club that have mastered arts of miniaturisation.
Climate experts and biologists led by Jan van Dam at the University of Utrecht in the Netherlands, overlaid a picture of species emergence and extinction with changes that occur in Earth's orbit and axis.
These three shifts in Earth's pattern of movement are relatively minor compared with those of other planets. 
One wave of extinction was roughly every 2.4 million years or so and the other was about every million years or so, coinciding with extremes in the cycles of ellipticality, wobble and tilt.
These were not swift, massive die-outs of the kind that famously wiped out the dinosaurs 65 million years ago, but rather a fade-out of species that could not cope with habitat loss or competition, especially when ice ages kicked in.
In The Pickwick Papers, Schoffer notes that Dickens links Parkinson's disease and dementia in an old man whose "limbs were shaking with disease and the palsy had fastened on his mind". 
Schoffer says Dickens also had a keen eye for people unsteady on their feet, with involuntary muscle movement, tremors and sleep problems.
Dickens had little formal education let alone clinical training. But Schoffer says he had access to people with movement disorders through leading physicians of the day. 
"Dickens's rise to prominence as an author meant he interacted with high society, which tended to be prominent physicians," Schoffer says.
Fiddler crabs with blue shells are vulnerable. So when hungry birds are around, they turn muddy brown
"We could observe that over a couple of days, the crabs did change their colour when they are confronted with this dummy bird," the researcher says.
For over 20 years, Srinivasan has been designing experiments to work out what information honey bees use to take off, land on flowers swaying in the breeze, navigate the world without bumping into things, and find targets.
Siberian lakes with peatlands
Methane occurs widely in nature when bacteria help decompose plant and animal material, without the benefit of oxygen.
"Why isn't there a cockroach that ate Dallas from recent history?" asks co-author Professor Jon Harrison of Arizona State University. "We can answer that question without a time machine."
Their findings help to explain the remains of millipedes over a metre long, 10 centimetre cockroaches and dragonflies with 75 centimetre wingspans dating to the late Palaeozoic period, just before dinosaurs came on the scene.
"If I'm asking you about your haemorrhoids in public, even if I don't mean to be mean by doing it, I'm nevertheless humiliating you and I'm not providing you with positive emotional support," he says.
He found that older people were more likely to ask in public if someone had put on weight, about their haemorrhoids, or whether they were still having problems with their partner.
Von Hippel would now like to do similar tests on a larger number of people using magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, to check if atrophy in the frontal lobes correlates with bluntness in older adults.
But he says the frontal lobe theory is supported by other research showing the people with frontal lobe brain damage are often more socially inappropriate.
It's coated with PVC and has water sensors on its back and left sleeve.
Shiftworkers or people with jet lag who drink coffee to keep themselves awake may not be able to catnap the next day, say Canadian researchers.
"Our results suggest that this recommendation should be made with caution since using caffeine before sleeping at an abnormal circadian phase, such as during night work, might have more adverse consequences on sleep quality than before sleeping at a normal circadian time." 
Over the weekend scientists exploring the Wollemi National Park northwest of Sydney announced the discovery of numerous shelters, many with rock drawings and stencils up to 5000 years old.
Beetles with the biggest horns have the smallest testes, say scientists who show that in evolutionary terms you can't have it all.
"What we did was test a fundamental assumption underlying evolution ... that males face a trade-off between competing for access to lots of females and investment in gaining fertilisation with those females," Simmons says.
The study also demonstrates the theory of sperm competition, which occurs when females mate with more than one partner, Simmons says.
In the latest experiments, the scientists bombarded the element californium with 10^19 calcium ions to create two atoms of element 118.
"We selected a completely different nuclear reaction, performed with completely different people in a different laboratory," says Dr Ken Moody, the Livermore team leader.
The Livermore-Dubna team says it's now looking to create element 120, by bombarding plutonium with iron isotopes.
One day we might be filling our cars with biodiesel produced using genetically modified organisms
He says there are benefits in using genetically modified or GM bugs in the fermentation of fuels like butanol, which he says is more "oil-like" than ethanol and mixes better with petrol, but is more difficult to produce.
Although the entire life cycle is not yet fully understood, it is clear that over two or three years the caterpillar goes through the usual stages of moulting, pupating and metamorphosing into a most unusual moth, all within the confines of a 5 millimetre wide stem.
Zhang's comments appear to clash with the conclusions of many other scientists and conservationists that many parts of the Asian mountain chain are likely to experience severe melting as global temperatures rise in coming decades.
As the melanoma cells expand and contract, they generate crackling sounds that can be picked them up with special microphones and analysed by computer. 
Other human cells do not contain pigments with the same colour as melanin, so the melanin signature is easy to tell apart from other noises, says Assistant Professor John Viator, a biomedical engineer who worked on the study. 
Long says the preserved remains of a Gogonasus fish from the Devonian period were found last year in the remote Kimberley area at the Gogo fossil site, once an 'ancient barrier reef' teeming with fish.
This image of the lunar south pole, together with radar echoes, was thought to be evidence for ice. Now scientists say it isn't ice, just rough terrain
The connection between wool fibre thickness and season has more to do with nutrition than weather, the researcher explains.
Aberrant science can involve the use of methods or the arrival at conclusions the majority don't agree with and is often shunned as if it was fraudulent, he says.
While fraud is clearly an undesirable form of aberrant science, Little says those whose only crime is to use unusual methods or reach unusual conclusions should not be treated with the same contempt.
Instead, he says, they should be greeted with open-mindedness, a feature that is supposed to be the hallmark of good science.
Scientists have made an invisibility cloak that works with microwaves. But there are many technical challenges before a cloak could work with visible light to make someone invisible
The cloaking device is said to deflect microwaves so they flow around a 'hidden' object inside it with little distortion, making it seem as if there was almost nothing there.
But the researchers, like many scientists, are not working with any particular goal in mind but hope its uses will become apparent later.
Every solid object scatters radiation that hits it, from microwaves through to visible light. It is this scattering that allows objects to be seen, whether with the eye or using radar or ultrasound. 
The cloak also only works with microwaves of a specific wavelength. And the researchers hope to broaden the range of wavelengths that it can block.
Such a cloak would have to simultaneously interact with all the wavelengths that make up light.
"It is very unlikely that we could do it with this technology in the visible [spectrum]," Smith says.
Microwave cloaks might be useful for eluding radar, says Professor Costas Soukoulis, a theorist with the US Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory in Iowa.
The researchers also point out that patients with this form of brain damage may have damage to the limbic system, a network within the brain essential for mediating emotions.
"The reports themselves have the potential to undermine people's motivations. If I believe that genes have a deterministic influence on my weight, will I still struggle to keep up with my diet and exercise routine?
So Dr Ivan Kempson, a research fellow based at the University of South Australia, came up with the idea of using a synchrotron to analyse Phar Lap's hair.
One of them, lead arsenide, could be associated with preservation, he says. But the other is more likely to be the result of ingestion.
"The other type of arsenic is consistent by its distribution and location and chemistry with him ingesting the arsenic between 30-40 hours prior to his death," he says.
"We've been going through a process of trying to prove ourselves wrong and look for alternative explanations but so far the results are consistent with him consuming arsenic." 
"The synchrotron without any shadow of a doubt gives you more information than you could have got in other ways. But whether or not it's conclusive, would it stand up in a court of law, personally I have my doubts," he says.
Kempson says more research is planned to hopefully finally lay the case to rest, including comparison with similar cases.
So far, Phar Lap's sample has only been compared with a stuffed monkey, he says. 
Instead, the worst die-offs happen when some sort of interminable, multi-generational pressure on life is combined with a few powerful blows.
Reading the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction literature and conversations with colleagues "made me wonder whether the simplistic scenario of 'everything's fine until one day in June when the asteroid hits and everything goes to hell-in-a-hand-basket' really explains the diversity of data," says plant fossil expert Associate Professor Nan Arens of Hobart and William Smith Colleges in New York. 
They divvied up the past 488 million years into four groups: suspected meteor impacts (pulses), gigantic volcanic flood basalt eruptions (presses), periods with neither presses nor pulses, and times when press and pulse coincided.
"The goal of our work was to come up with a unifying theory of mass extinctions," says West.
In the late Cretaceous case massive volcanism, the Deccan Traps eruption in India, and attendant climate change, coincided with an impact that pushed highly stressed biota over the brink. 
"I'm very happy they have done the analysis based on the literature and come up with the same conclusions that palaeontologists have been preaching all along," Keller says.
The researchers infected mice with a virus called Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, which is similar to human poliovirus.
"We hypothesise that mild memory and cognitive impairments of unknown aetiology may, in fact, be due to accumulative loss of hippocampus function caused by repeated infection with common and widespread neurovirulent picornaviruses."
They are looking at the drug cabergoline, which reduces fertility and interferes with maternal instincts, to see if it could control foxes on Phillip Island in Victoria.
He's working with University of Tasmania pharmacologist Professor Stuart McLean to study cabergoline.
Internet law experts have called for Australian copyright laws to be amended so people can post online videos of themselves miming pop songs without risking prosecution.
"A 12 year old girl uploads a video of herself lip-syncing the latest Shakira pop song onto YouTube and is served with a copyright infringement notice," they write.
He's arguing for a defence of material being "highly transformative" and not competing with the original market. 
This would allow a 12 year old amateur to upload a video of herself miming to a sound track with impunity.
"It doesn't have to be a radical change [to the amendments], but something that allows someone to remix a  small amount of someone else's work and put it in a different context as long as it's not for commercial purposes and doesn't compete with the original," he says.
But Dr Rafael Navarro-Gonz&aacute;lez, a researcher with the National Autonomous University of Mexico, and colleagues have another explanation for the Viking results.
The researchers built their theory on studies conducted with Viking-type instruments in some of Earth's harshest environments: the Antarctic Dry Valleys, the Atacama Desert of Chile and Peru, and deserts in Libya. 
Over the past 10 years, NASA has dispatched a series of increasingly sophisticated probes to Mars to survey minerals and geological formations from above the planet's surface, and to analyse soil and rock chemistry with rovers on the ground.
Prosecutors have charged Hwang with fraud to secure funds and misusing US$2.9 million in state funds and private donations as well as violating bioethics laws in procuring human eggs for research. 
Surgeons may perform a full face transplant within months
The world's first full face transplant, which was authorised by a UK medical watchdog this week, is hedged with technical, psychological and ethical challenges, experts say. 
The green light given to surgeon Mr Peter Butler by the ethics committee at London's Royal Free Hospital opens the way to an operation that could take place within months.
But microsurgery also carries a 5-10% risk of transplant failure from clots that may form within the connected blood vessels in the first few days after surgery.
The technique is still experimental but has had promising results with kidney transplant patients.
Selecting the patient with the right profile is one of the hardest tasks of all. 
The face is the mark of one's identity, so wearing someone else's face, or seeing someone else with the face of a deceased relative, for instance, may be deeply disturbing for some.
"The challenge we face is that the people who cope least well with facial injury may also be the [people who] cope least well with facial transplantation  and its long-term impact on lifestyle."
The queen lives 10 times as long as workers and lays up to 2000 eggs a day. Despite having tiny brains, honey bees display honed cognitive abilities and learn to associate a flower's colour, shape and scent with food, which increases its foraging ability. 
A turbocharger is added to produce more power. The ethanol injection system with the turbocharger would give a driver more power than a conventional engine of the same size, the scientists say.
The researchers are developing and testing their system with car manufacturer Ford.
Geologists know this thanks to new technology that measures the age of the minerals by the minute quantities of uranium and lead isotopes within them. The isotopes reveal how long it has been since the zircon solidified from molten rock. 
In the case of the Amazon zircons, Mapes with his US and Brazilian colleagues, discovered that the minerals don't come from the relatively young Andes at all.
"You couldn't tell this without this new tool," says geologist Dr Paul Link of Idaho State University, referring to the technology to sample individual layers of zircon minerals with precision, and then count the isotope atoms to gauge age. 
Like warriors with different weapons, however, the two animals had distinct fighting techniques, says lead author Professor Daniel Fisher, a University of Michigan palaeontologist.
A Botai village, with its horse yards, would have looked like this
"We really don't understand any major signs of changes in horses with domestication," says Dr Melinda Zeder, an archaeologist at the Smithsonian Institution who specialises in the origins of animal and plant domestication. 
Nor, so far, is there a direct way to determine what people were doing with their horses that early on, she says.
For these reasons she and her colleagues have been building their case with less direct evidence.
Inside the yard, the soil contained up to 10 times the phosphorus as outside soils, but lower concentrations of nitrogen. That's what you'd expect if the soil inside the yard was enriched with horse manure.
Modern horse manure, for comparison, is loaded with phosphorous, potassium and nitrogen. The nitrogen is the easiest to lose to groundwater or the air. 
So what were the Botai doing with those horses?
Some female marsupials have sex with as many males as possible to produce the fittest and healthiest offspring, Australian researchers report.
In the first, they took female marsupials from the wild and when they were in season allowed them to mate either with a single male, or with three different males, every two days.
They found the females in both populations weren't particularly fussy and, given the chance, mated happily with multiple partners.
"By experimentally assigning mates to females, we were able to show that polyandry [females mating with more than one male during the mating season] greatly increases offspring survival," Fisher says.
While many females in the animal and plant world mate with multiple partners, researchers have been at a loss to explain why. After all, the practice can be costly in terms of egg production, disease and injury. 
Young women obsessed with their own body image eat more food after looking at magazine adverts that feature the 'ideal' thin body, research shows.
But those with a healthier body image, who you might expect to be less influenced by the adverts, eat less.
"[Women obsessed with their appearance] see the idealised image and think about their own body so turn to food. They might think 'what's the point, I'm never going to look like that, I may as well eat' or the image makes them think they're thinner than they are so they eat more."
The women's answers categorised women as low or high self-objectifiers, with high self-objectifiers valuing appearance more.
Body-obsessed people (or high objectifiers) ate more food (sweet and savoury biscuits) and sweet biscuits, after viewing idealised body adverts than adverts without models.
The search for a modern animal to act as a proxy for dinosaur tracks started, says Breithaupt, because he was getting a little impatient with all the speculation about the tracks.
What can be said with more certainty is that the dinosaurs were walking in a very different landscape than today, says Kvale.
That mission would have left the 16-year-old observatory with fresh batteries, replacement gyroscopes for steering and two new science instruments.
Now, with three post-Columbia flights complete, the time has come to decide Hubble's fate.
NASA is considering if the safety upgrades implemented after the accident offset the risk of flying with few options available to save a stranded shuttle crew.
"Hubble is definitely sort of the comeback kid, so hopefully it will be able to do it one more time," says Professor Adam Riess, an astronomer with the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore.
"I would expect that this is the final meeting," he adds. "Now it's a matter of coming up a with a decision."
The first order of business was to fix problems with debris falling off the ship's fuel tank during launch.
But there is no getting around the issue of flying without an orbital safe. Hubble's orbit is too far from the station for a shuttle to get there.
Station assembly, which resumed with last month's flight of shuttle Atlantis, would be complete in July 2010 under the new manifest.
"It would really be a blow," says astronomer Dr Harry Ferguson, also with the Space Telescope Science Institute. "I think everyone is really quite hopeful that [a repair mission] will happen. We're waiting with bated breath."
Cai says warming will be most rapid in the Tasman Sea, which could heat up by 4&#176;C by 2100, with major implications for marine life and ecosystems.
Cooler northern hemisphere temperatures should mean cooler northern oceans, and cooler waters should equate with lower sea levels.
Church says it's unclear exactly how dropping aerosol levels will affect global temperatures when combined with rising temperatures associated with the greenhouse effect.
Zoos around the world will soon be able to breed their own koalas without having to fly in breeding stock from Australia, researchers say.
The team this week unveiled eight koala joeys born from artificial insemination with the diluted semen.
Diluting the semen without affecting the ovulation factor was a major challenge for researchers, he says.
Koalas have a relatively low sperm count with only about 100 million sperm per ejaculation, compared with echidnas, which have 10 times that amount.
It allows you to choose a slice with more chocolate icing. But the trade-off is that you get a smaller piece.
"How do you associate a number with something like happiness?" he says.
The 'egg yolk' theory describes how best to divide a fried egg into pieces with an equal portion of yolk and white.
The other challenge has to do with the nozzles.
The difference has to do with the way Einat and his team built the printer head. They turned to the same technology used to manufacture computer chips, etching the printer head out of silicon wafer chips.
When presented with a jumbo-sized mirror, elephants recognise their reflections and investigate the inside of their mouths and ears, according to a new study.
As soon as Happy saw the visible mark, she touched it with her trunk in front of the mirror. She did this 47 times. Maxine and Patty, however, ignored the marks on their foreheads.
The accident raised serious safety questions for NASA, particularly with the shuttle's heat shield.
NASA also is faced with a busy schedule of another 15 missions to finish building the space station before retiring the entire shuttle program in 2010, or four missions a year. 
But babies with the defect die because the reflexes are impaired, she says. 
Public health campaigns aimed at reducing the risk of SIDS have advised parents to put infants to sleep on their back, and to avoid soft bedding, sharing a bed with an infant, smoking during pregnancy and smoking around a baby after birth.
The findings may spur development of a diagnostic test to identify infants at risk, or perhaps some day a drug or other type of treatment to protect infants with abnormal brainstem serotonin systems, the authors say. 
"This finding lends credence to the view that SIDS risk may greatly increase when an underlying predisposition combines with an environmental risk, such as sleeping face down, at a developmentally sensitive time in early life," says Dr Duane Alexander, director of the US National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, which helped to pay for the study.
A two-day Serious Games Summit near Washington saw some 500 game designers, publishers, academic experts as well as representatives from the defence and health sectors share information about new 'serious games' on the market that deal with real-world issues. 
Among games featured at the summit were The Redistricting Game, which teaches administrators how legislative redistricting works; HumanSim, which tests medical diagnostic skills; and Tactical Iraqi, a program to train US soldiers with linguistic and cultural skills needed for missions in Iraq. 
That game, largely funded by the US Department of Defense, encourages soldiers who face various scenarios with virtual Iraqis to use diplomacy to avoid or defuse tense situations. Players are also familiarised with basic Iraqi culture.
Green lights are synchronised into 'green waves' to allow cars to flow through the main avenues of cities without facing a red light.
The red wine molecule seems to mimic the benefits of eating less without the effort of dieting. But will it work in humans?
Resveratrol seems to mimic the beneficial effects of eating less without the hassle of dieting. 
In addition to increasing survival, the compound reduced the negative effects of being obese so the mice treated with resveratrol lived as long as the lean mice. 
Sirtris Pharmaceuticals, a therapeutics company co-founded by Sinclair, has started a trial of a proprietary formulation of resveratrol in patients with type 2 diabetes.
"[This data suggests the Navare] pigs were recently domesticated within southeast Asia and dispersed during the human colonisation of remote Oceania associated with the Lapita cultural complex," write the researchers.
Interestingly, the researchers found that the other native Pacific pig they studied, Kapia, shared much of its DNA with introduced European breeds.
The researchers say these breeds would have been chosen for crossing with native breeds because they had the same dark coat as the natives, ensuring the offspring remained protected from the tropical sun.
He says European farmers bred their pigs with the fatter Chinese breeds to get a better domestic animal.
With lots of different species in the oceans, just as with lots of different kinds of investments, "you spread the risk around", Worm says. 
For example, using a small machine might require less fuel and would not compact the soil the way heavy machinery does. There is a cost associated with the labour needed to undo the compacting that occurs each year, says Pedersen.
There will still be fish on the menu, governments say, despite warnings that stocks will be depleted within 50 years
"Such a massive collapse ... would require reckless behaviour of all industries and governments for four decades, and an incredible level of apathy of all world citizens to let this happen, without mentioning economic forces that would discourage this from happening," says Serge Michel Garcia, director of the FAO's fishery resources division.
Lowering the body temperature of mice without limiting the amount of food they eat can prolong their lives, a new study shows.
So, the researchers carried out the study to determine whether calorie reduction is indeed responsible for extending animals' life, with a lowering of the body temperature being a secondary effect, or whether the latter is actually the cause of the increased longevity. 
Earlier this year the federal government announced its proposed changes to copyright law, which it says are designed to keep up with the rapidly changing digital landscape.
"Google could very well become more reluctant to provide such comprehensive image and news services ... and with geo-identification technology you can also offer certain content in some countries and not others."
The researchers then recruited five patients with HIV who were beginning to fail treatment. Their drugs no longer worked and the virus was beginning to damage their immune systems. 
June's team removed the immune cells, CD4 T-cells, that HIV attacks. The researchers infected the CD4 cells in the lab with their newly engineered antisense HIV virus, then infused them back onto the patients.
To do this they created a single flying wing, with the body of the aircraft also functioning to give lift.
The new plane also does away with flaps, a major source of noise, while the undercarriage has been simplified and its aerodynamics improved.
"I ask you with the most sincere and profound concern to ensure that neither the quantity nor the quality of the scientific research capacity at the Australian Museum suffers as a result of the proposed merger," he says.
Scientists from the University of Sydney, University of Wollongong and the Australian Marine Sciences Association have also written to express concern, as has a delegation of prominent members of the science community that is understood to have presented the government with a petition last week.
In a letter to scientists, Debus says the government is doing a feasibility study to examine the "benefits, costs and issues" associated with combining the boards of the two museums.
The most colossal x-ray flare ever detected has been caught in the act of zapping its solar system with planet-killing radiation.
It starts with a tangle of magnetic field lines on the surface of a star that short-circuits. When that happens, atomic particles are accelerated to speeds only seen on Earth in high-tech particle accelerators.
When the satellite turned to face II Pegasi, it took aim with its x-ray detector and caught the hour-long eruption of x-rays.
Fortunately our own Sun is relatively quiet and stable, with x-ray flares that are unable to penetrate Earth's atmosphere.
This involves removing the nucleus from an egg and replacing it with one from a non-reproductive body cell, of a patient for example, to produce an embryo, the same method used to produce Dolly the sheep.
It comes at the same time that researchers in the UK are requesting permission to use cow eggs fused with human material for research on Parkinson's, stroke and Alzheimer's.
Professor Alan Trounson of Monash University in Melbourne says the decision is consistent with public opinion show by surveys to be 60-80% in favour of therapeutic cloning.
Even better than that, it can be matched with cores of similar amplitude drilled in the Greenland icesheet.
The glacial climate in the Northern Atlantic can swing extraordinarily rapidly, with temperatures rising by 8-16&deg;C within the space of a few decades at the end of each Ice Age and falling back, albeit more slowly, when the next Ice Age beckons.
The scientists believe further research could lead to the first human retinal cell transplants for people with blinding diseases within a decade.
"We have taken them out of the donor retina and transplanted them into a host retina extremely quickly at that precise point in time and with minimal trauma to the surrounding tissue," MacLaren explains. 
"Rather than focusing on stem cells we believed that if we could understand how cells develop and become photoreceptors ... our transplantation efforts would meet with greater success," says Professor Anand Swaroop, of the University of Michigan Medical School and a co-author of the study.
Online searches can help doctors keep up to date with an increasing pool of medical research
They then plugged the symptoms of each case into the search engine to come up with a diagnosis.
When these diagnoses were compared with the correct published diagnoses, the researchers found that Google got it right 58% of the time.
They say an online search is likely to be more effective at helping to diagnose conditions with unique symptoms that can be used as search terms.
Google in particular gives access to more than three billion articles, they say, with Google Scholar restricting searches to peer reviewed articles.
Professor Johanna Westbrook of the Centre for Health Informatics in Sydney says the findings are consistent with her own.
Interestingly though, a few clinicians got the wrong answers using the search engines, although they got the right answers without them.
Westbrook says that while Google might be good for helping find information about diseases with unique symptoms, more sophisticated search engines would be required for more complex diseases.
Scientists have been debating whether Neanderthals, who died out about 35,000 years ago, ever bred with modern H. sapiens. Neanderthals are considered more primitive, with robust bones but a smaller intellects than modern humans.
Each of these spawning sea urchins share more than 7000 genes with humans
And it shares 7077 of them with humans.
Sea urchins also carry genes associated with human diseases such as muscular dystrophy and Huntington's. 
The creatures also have genes associated with taste, smell, hearing and balance, the study found.
Researchers know that picture books can help 4-5 year old preschoolers with a range of literary and 'life' skills.
Some 36 children in each of three age groups (18 months, 24 months and 30 months) were read either a picture book featuring colour photographs of a rattle being made, a picture book with coloured pencil drawings of a rattle being made, or not read a book at all.
Toddlers aged 24 months and 30 months did equally well with both versions of the book.
Simcock says the findings are exciting, but don't mean that parents should only read their children only picture books with real-life photographs.
The idea is you would be able to recharge your laptop without plugging it in
You may one day be able to recharge your laptop or mobile phone without having to plug it into the wall, says a US physicist.
"The team calculates that an object the size of a laptop could be recharged within a few metres of the power source," he says. "Placing one source in each room could provide coverage throughout your home."
They say the challenge is finding a 'magic' frequency that doesn't also affect with living organisms and thus pose possible health risks.
"You would be reintroducing all the problems that we went through with mobile phones," says Dr Geoff Anstis of the University of Technology, Sydney, referring to the uncertainty surrounding any long-term health effects of using mobiles.
His colleague Professor Geoff Smith agrees and says there are also technical challenges to keeping the devices tuned with the transmitters, thus preventing the general release of stray energy.
And with a temperature of around minus 170&deg;C, there is no ocean, nor warm tropical water to pump its strength.
"The winds decrease with height and the atmosphere is sinking, compressing and heating over the [planet's] south pole," says Dr Richard Achterberg of NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center.
"I thought we needed to do something that was a little less serious that people could have fun with," Helmer says.
They were also shown a video with various parts of the bowler's body blocked out, for example, with just a hand.
Experiments were also carried out on the field with batsmen wearing goggles that blacked out parts of the bowler's body.
The fact that dust could be forming in space without metals could mean astronomers may have to revise their basic theories on where and out of what sort of dust newer stars and planets form.
"Our overall impression is that, with a few notable and inspiring exceptions, environmental considerations are not high on the agenda in the film and television industry, and that more could be done within the industry to foster environmentally friendly approaches," the professors say.
These include medications such as penicillin, and even some foods and beverages, such as walnuts and soft drinks. Women with other allergies tend to be more prone to semen allergies.
The second involves removing other proteins known to sometimes interfere with the desensitisation process from the semen plasma, and then injecting a small amount of the processed semen at regular intervals.
Jonathan Bernstein, a professor of medicine at the University of Cincinnati, and one of the world's leading experts on semen allergies, says he agrees with Resnick.
And Bryant says there have been up to 10 such impacts in the past 10,000 years, based on research with others, including Assistant Professor Dallas Abbott from the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University.
Bryant says chevrons about 4800 years old around the Indian Ocean are associated with a 29 kilometre wide impact crater located thousands of kilometres to the southeast of Madagascar.
They believe the potential of nanotechnology, which operates on an atom-sized scale, will not be realised without clear information about the true risks and how to avoid them. 
The experts say instruments to assess environmental exposure to nanomaterials must be developed in the next three to 10 years and that methods are needed within the next 15 years to evaluate the toxicity of nanomaterials.
They also stress the need to develop models within a decade to predict the potential impact of new nanomaterials on health and the environment, and strategic programmes for risk-focused research over the next 12 months. 
Analysis of Neanderthal DNA shows they rarely interbred with our ancestors, as some scientists have suggested
Researchers have sequenced DNA from the leg bone of a Neanderthal man who died 38,000 years ago and say it shows the Neanderthals are truly distant relatives of modern humans who interbred rarely, if at all, with our own immediate ancestors.
This conflicts with some evidence from other researchers, including a team who said earlier this month that humans may have inherited a brain gene from Neanderthals. 
Paabo was the first scientist to find and sequence Neanderthal DNA, in 1997, and first suggested that Neanderthals did not mix with modern humans. 
Paabo's team says it hopes to have a complete genetic sequence within two years.
The researchers found, for instance, sequences linked with eye colour but cannot read the code to tell what colour Neanderthal eyes were.
"It's a major advance in the field," says Floreano, who is not associated with the research. 
The robot begins by getting a sense of itself, testing each of its joints with random motions. Sensors on the joints capture each joint's range of motion and feed that information to the 15 mathematical models built into its controlling software. 
"That could be a potential challenge," says Floreano, especially if the robot is equipped with many sensors. 
Modelling tools available in the software could be used to optimise the chemical structure of the compound and analyse whether those changes make it interact better or worse with a potential target.
Romberg has partnered with experts at eight universities, institutes and companies from France, Germany, Italy, Estonia and Switzerland to compile the system.
She says the user-friendly program should "help the chemical industry and European regulatory bodies evaluate the substances and assess related risks, with fewer and fewer animal tests."
In theory, experimental tests may not be necessary with Chemomentum. Rather, users would input information about the leads and targets they are interested in and the system would return the corresponding toxicity predictions.
An international online survey of paranormal experiences has met with an overwhelming response, say Australian researchers.
She says 96% of respondents claim to have had at least one brush with the paranormal,
While the survey was anonymous, some people later sent emails with their contact details, Jane says. 
Some studies found that massage reduced babies' levels of the stress hormones norepinephrine and epinephrine and appeared to release melatonin, which is associated with sleep patterns.
But the nine studies failed to come up with any evidence of cognitive or behavioural benefits.
In addition to vocalisations, the researchers found that whales send messages through body language, by breaching the surface, slapping water with their tails and blowing underwater bubbles.
"If he's trying to attract a female, but doesn't want his signal confused with another singer in the area, then using song units in this case might be the way forward."
This cottonseed could serve as a high-protein food for the world's hungry, and falls well within the criteria set by the World Health Organization and US Food and Drug Administration for food consumption, the researchers say.
The chemical is present naturally within the glands in the above-ground parts of the cotton plant. 
Researchers estimate that it will take at least another decade to develop cotton varieties with these qualities for broad commercial production. 
In addition to edible cottonseed, the RNAi technique might be applied to other crops with toxic components, such as fava beans, to increase their use, the researchers say.
These findings "raise red flags", LeMasters and her colleagues write, and point to a need for "innovative comfortable protective equipment allowing firefighters to do their job without compromising their health". 
Chimpanzee males prefer to have sex with older females, according to US researchers, showing one of the biggest behavioural differences between humans and our closest biological relatives.
"Chimpanzee copulations are frequently preceded by a series of male courtship signals (eg, glancing with erect penis and branch shaking), after which either the male or the female approaches the other to mate," the researchers write. 
This is most definitely not the case with chimps. The very oldest adult females were the most sought after. 
"They don't have to do anything to get the males interested. The males find them. They follow them around. If you look at the very youngest females, the males will mate with them but it does take more work on the female's part." 
Also unlike humans, female chimpanzees actively advertise when they are fertile, with bright red swellings around the genital area.
"The males do end up mating with all the females for the most part," Muller notes. But he says the study challenges common conceptions. 
Morrell says the study also shows some people trust the public sector more with their tissue than private companies.
"As long as research was being done in a public hospital they would feel comfortable with that," she says.
"But as genetic technology has evolved you can find out more and do more with that material. There wasn't as much at stake until recently."
The probe went silent after reporting problems with a sticky solar panel, and scans of the skies have produced no sign of it. 
Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, lost contact with the spacecraft on 2 November after it signalled it was having trouble moving one of its solar panels to track the Sun as it emerged from behind Mars.
The spacecraft is programmed to position itself so that a stuck panel faces the Sun, but that orientation could block its communication with mission controllers, says Tom Thorpe, the Mars Global Surveyor project manager.
Each extra year, in comparison with others in the speed-dating group, reduces a man's chance of finding a partner by 4%. For women it is 5%. 
The results show that there are just 17 distinct genetic groups within the region.
This is about 1.26 times the water used by an equivalent coal-fired power station, says the report by Dr Ian Rose of Roam Consulting, a Queensland-based company with expertise in energy modelling.
He says the left-hander's brain is wired slightly differently to the right-hander's as it tends to be more symmetrical with larger and perhaps faster connections between hemispheres.
The research found that on average those with faster connections were more efficient at performing tasks that require processing in two hemispheres.
"Examples might be dealing with multiple stimuli that are presented very briefly or tasks which require interpretation of a lot of information such as talking while driving in heavy traffic, piloting a jet fighter or playing fast computer games.
These include genes involved in rare genetic disorders such as DiGeorge, Williams-Beuren and Prader-Willi syndromes and those linked with schizophrenia, cataracts, spinal muscular atrophy and atherosclerosis. 
It's a large elliptical galaxy about 80 million light-years away, believed to have recently collided and merged with a spiral galaxy, which may have something to do with the accelerated rate of supernovae, or not.
Dr Etienne Bustarret of France's National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) in Grenoble and colleagues converted the silicon by 'doping' it with high levels of boron, using a pulsed laser at normal pressure.
Superconductivity has been found in only a number of materials which, at very cold temperatures, allow electricity to flow through them without offering any resistance or losing some of the energy as heat.
Their semiconductors would not be hampered by heat, one of the biggest problems facing designers today who are tasked with crowding ever more circuits onto a chip.
Exotic oxides, cooled by liquid nitrogen, have provided the best transition temperatures to superconductivity, with temperatures as high as 160&deg;K.
In fast-scoring games like basketball it can be quite hard to keep up-to-date with constantly changing statistics that help you understand what's going on, says Page.
Page developed a basketball jersey with displays made out of electroluminescent panels that light up when electricity flow through them. These are connected by conductive thread woven into the jersey.
One warns when the game is nearly up and the other warns when they need to shoot without incurring a penalty.
He says the players found the displays intuitive and easy to understand without being distracting.
The coach and referee can also use the displays to choose who to keep on the court, without having to refer to the benches and scoreboards as often, says Page.
Teams of people with hearing disabilities, debaters and possibly even orchestra members, might also benefit from the technology, says Page.
"We really can produce wheat with more protein and more zinc and iron," Dubcovsky says.
The gene made the grain mature more quickly while also boosting its protein and micronutrient content by 10-15% in the pasta and bread wheat varieties with which the researchers worked.
"We didn't do it by genetic modification. The normal wheat crosses perfectly well with the wild wheat. So we just crossed it after normal breeding," Dubcovsky says.
"We think these are the first analyses of this type at this large scale," says Dr Peter Wagner, associate curator of fossil invertebrates at the Field Museum and lead author of the study, who worked with Dr Matthew Kosnik of James Cook University. 
Polonium interferes with the body's ability to repair itself
"It is not as simple as the idea that somebody might have broken into a radioactivity cabinet at some local hospital and walked off with some polonium," says Dr Andrea Sella, a lecturer in chemistry at University College London.
"The limited information that has been released about Mr Litvinenko's condition and the timing of his death is consistent with either radiation poisoning or chemicals that stop cell division," he says.
"That could end up with positive nutritional health benefits for diabetes and high cholesterol."
The study is being conducted with the Queensland Department of Primary Industries.
Irvine's study, conducted with the PhD student Kate Morefield, analysed 10 people who took ecstasy in a party setting.
The researches found spindle neurones in the same location in toothed whales with the largest brains, which the researchers say suggests the cells may be related to brain size.
Either the spindle neurones were only kept in the animals with the largest brains or they evolved several times independently, the researchers say. 
All snails have a mantle, which creates their shell. But marine snails don't build their shells from within.
They then collaborated with German colleagues from the University of G&ouml;ttingen to analyse how these genes are expressed.
Each gene is expressed in a specific part of the mantle, with each area responsible for creating a specific shape, pattern or colour on the shell.
"What happens is that the mantle secretes proteins and somehow these proteins interact with the seawater to make the shell," Degnan says.
By comparing the abalone DNA sequences with the genome of a related mollusc, the team showed that the genes encoding the secreted mantle proteins are likely to be rapidly evolving.
Australia's free trade deal with the US may mean nanotherapies may be rushed through tests for safety, efficacy and quality, one critic says. But not everyone agrees
Australia may be forced to rush through inadequately tested and unsafe medical nanotherapies because of its free trade agreement with the US, a health technology regulation expert says.
"The main concern is that the FTA puts obligations on the TGA to initiate a discussion [with US authorities] about fast tracking innovative medical products," he says.
"Major concern with this unprecedented research and development is that engineered nanoparticles may present unique health risks when used in medical applications," Faunce says.
"They are highly reactive and mobile within the human body and there are currently no effective methods to monitor exposure risks."
Monash University's Professor Brian Priestly, director of the Australian Centre for Human Health Risk Assessment, says it's probably true that developments in nanotechnology are happening too fast for the regulators to keep up with them.
"But that's not to say that it's being ignored," says Priestly, who has worked with the TGA in the past.
While scientists have trained wasps to respond to the trace of explosives, Haarmann says research with bees appeared to show more promise. 
"It would be great to start saving some lives with this," he says.
This happens when particles from the strong stellar wind collide with particles from the compact object.
It linked the solar year with a 19-year cycle in the phases of the Moon. This is the so-called Metonic cycle, which takes the Moon 235 lunar months to the same phase on the same date in the year.
They used 3D x-ray computation tomography and high-resolution surface imaging to peek beneath the machine's surface, yet without damaging the priceless artefact.
It not only provided the Metonic cycle, which was known to the Babylonians, it also gave the so-called Callippic cycle, which is four Metonic cycles minus one day and reconciles the solar year with the lunar calendar. 
Or had it withered away and disappeared, leaving Islamic scholars with the task of rediscovering what had been known 1000 years before?
"Are these two totally distinct groups that came in or are they representatives of one major group that came in that has all that diversity within it?" he asks.
Van Holst Pellekaan says some Y-chromosome studies of Aboriginal people from Central Australia have found a connection with India, but there have been no comprehensive studies of this type.
Van Holst Pellekaan says despite the links with the global lineages that came out of Africa, the Australian groups are quite different from those shown in samples from Papua New Guinea, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Malaysia.
Van Holst Pellekaan accepts the idea of tracing Aboriginal people back to Africa can clash with some cultural beliefs, which she respects.
"I can only give them the information I come up with. I don't ask them to believe it."
Spider monkeys chew fragrant plants and 'anoint' themselves with the smelly mash. But no-one is sure why
"In general, I agree with the [new] findings," says Campbell. But she hasn't yet ruled out other possible reasons for scent rubbing.
While the effects may wane in adults after a few years, one expert points out that the effects may be more permanent in children with growing brains.
Dr Masatoshi Inagaki of the Breast Cancer Survivors' Brain MRI Database Group in Japan and colleagues tested more than 200 breast cancer patients, some who had chemotherapy along with surgery and some who did not.
Dr Joerg Dietrich and colleagues at the University of Rochester in New York worked with human brain cells in lab dishes.
When they treated live mice with the drugs, Dietrich's team found that brain cells in the mice continued to die for at least six weeks after the end of treatment.
"Very high-dose chemotherapy, requiring bone marrow transplantation or peripheral stem cell support, is now standard therapy for children with certain brain tumours, especially for the very young," she adds.
"There are no easy answers. We must balance the need for survival with quality of life."
The Ngarrindjeri people put the repatriated remains of their ancestors to rest. Image used with permission from the Aboriginal community
Members of a thriving medical research community took Ngarrindjeri human remains during the 19th century and as late as the 1950s, says Flinders University archaeologist Dr Lynley Wallis, who is helping with the project.
"Sometimes it was within days or weeks [of burial]," she says. "Worse than that, they were being taken out of the morgue in Adelaide."
But in an interview last year with a Flinders University researcher, chair of the Ngarrindjeri Heritage Committee, Uncle Tom Trevorrow, explained the need for reburial ceremonies for the repatriated remains of Old People, the term of respect used when referring to ancestors.
"We're forced to do a repeat of a funeral ceremony because other people have gone in and taken our Old People's bodies without listening to us or getting our permission," he said.
"If they get into the air and we inhale them, yeah, they're likely to present the same sorts of risks we have with other types of air pollution of very fine particles."
Tumours associated with titanium nanoparticles, which are used in sunscreen, have been found in research animals, he says. And in the lab, "quantum dots kill cells quite happily".
"But we've been living with [combustion-derived nanoparticles since caveman times and we've learned to adapt to it."
We may soon be getting weather reports from Mars without sending probes into space. And scientists say an old way of gathering data may do the trick
And before spacecraft images revealed the planet's surface features, astronomers tried to use variations in the density of carbon dioxide to map the topography, with mixed results.
These show remarkable agreement with the accurate topographical data obtained from the Mars Orbiting Laser Altimeter aboard the Mars Global Surveyor. 
This will provide a pressure map that will help with understanding weather patterns through seasonal changes across the planet.  
Researchers from the Institute of Psychiatry at King's College London monitored the emotional responses of six men who had committed repeat offences such as attempted murder, rape with strangulation and grievous bodily harm. 
It is thought that people with psychopathic disorders lack empathy because they cannot process when someone is distressed, for instance a face that looks scared.
Their brains were then imaged with functional MRI, a type of brain scan that shows which parts of the brain 'light up' in response to these images.
"With the generation IV reactors you will go for a fuel element that is enriched particles of uranium interspersed with silicon and carbon in a small ball or hexagonal shaped fuel element," he says.
"When you bring in any new technology it's got to be proved and tested and the final analysis is, is it commercially competitive in terms of producing electricity by comparison with the currently used reactors?" he says.
It found whitetip reef sharks are declining at an average rate of 7% a year with a 17% rate of decline for grey reef sharks. 
The study predicts that if the trend continues populations will drop to 5% and 0.1% of what they would be without fishing.
Conolly says the results show that fishing is threatening reef sharks with ecological extinction, where their numbers will be so small they will no longer play a role in the marine ecosystem.
Better predictions of when volcanoes are going to erupt may be possible with a new computer model developed by Australian scientists.
"It's been eluding us exactly what the volcano is trying to tell us with these signals," Hale says.
"People have had a go at trying to correlate shear bands with these earthquakes, but so far it hasn't been convincing."
Cut marks associated with butchery were found on some of the remains, particularly those of the younger individuals.
It appears that Neanderthals fell into at least two basic ethnic groups that coincided with their north-south geographical distribution.
Scientists are now debating whether interbreeding with modern humans occurred and why all of these Neanderthal groups appear to have gone extinct.
"It does look, from a variety of data, that Neanderthals were subject to episodes of extreme scarcity, with which their cultural and social systems sometimes couldn't cope," says Professor Steven Kuhn, an anthropologist at the University of Arizona.
"We're looking at major reductions in the total cost without the need for major scientific breakthroughs," Blakers says.
Blakers invented the technology with colleague Dr Klaus Weber and developed it with funding from energy supplier Origin Energy and the Australian Research Council.
"Now is the time to educate the public aggressively with facts about the risks and benefits of nanotechnology," they say.
But whether or not nanoparticles present a risk, for example, will be partly determined by what people do with them, says Healy.
"No one expected what we found today," says Dr Kenneth Edgett, a scientist with Malin Space Science Systems in San Diego. "We are talking about liquid water that is present on Mars right now."
Both show the gullies had filled with a light-coloured deposit, which is believed to be frozen water.
Scientists believe the water emanated from deep within the planet and gradually welled up toward the surface. Once it encountered the frigid Martian air, however, it froze, forming an ice dam.
They first tested a control group of bats, which headed due south towards the roost without a problem. 
Nathan Muchhala, of the University of Miami, suggests the extreme length of the bat's tongue coevolved with the long flowers of the plant.
To test their system, the team went to Tenerife in the Canary Islands, where the European Space Agency operates a telescope specifically designed to communicate with satellites.
The next step is to try the system out with an actual satellite, a project which is likely to involve the European Space Agency and others.
Australian stem cell researchers will start negotiating with IVF clinics to access human eggs following this week's landmark decision to overturn a ban on creating cloned embryos specifically for scientific research.
Under the new laws such an embryo would be permitted to grow for 14 days and provide scientists with stem cells for use in research.
The virus is transmitted by direct contact with blood, organs or other bodily fluids. There is no cure or good treatment, although several groups are working on vaccines. 
"By 2002 we had identified 10 social groups with 143 individuals," they write. 
Eventually the researchers counted 221 dead gorillas. Based on what they and other experts knew, Walsh extrapolated what the total impact must be to come up with the estimate of 5500 gorillas killed by Ebola in that area. 
Their report supports a study published in July that showed gorillas were spreading the virus within their social groups. 
This makes them more likely to infect a sexual partner with HIV.
Of the 39.5 million people worldwide infected with HIV, 24.7 million are in the poor countries of sub-Saharan Africa. About 2.1 million of the world's 2.9 million AIDS deaths in the past year were also in this region.
The researchers produced their results with a mathematical model using HIV and malaria infection data gathered in Malawi by Dr James Kublin of the Hutchinson Center.
He says once a person with HIV gets malaria, his or her viral load goes up and stays higher for six to eight weeks, making the person far more infectious to others.
"Such purchases are mainly to make statements about ourselves. And people are not very good in figuring out what statement to make, and what to make it with.
The next time you email the IT help desk, you may find yourself dealing with a computer, not a human.
"Help desk operators are generally dealing with the same thing over and over again," says Marom.
And if they get fed up they can always opt out and contact a human instead with the click a button, says Marom.
But he says the next step is to evaluate the system online with a real-life email help desk.
"But this is a very primitive mammal and it's unlikely to have lived here for 60 million years without diversification. So it opens the possibility that there may be bigger mammals to be found."
But the paper suggests that the discovery, along with other Mesozoic survivors such as the lizard-like tuatara and New Zealand's primitive frogs, confirms that at least some land remained above water throughout the period.
He says one big puzzle is how creatures cope with shifts in temperatures. For instance, water on the seabed at 3000 metres is just 2&deg;C yet many creatures withstand near-boiling temperatures of up to 80&deg;C from the thermal vent.
German says it is a bit like a person agreeing to live in a blistering sauna and be hosed at random with freezing water. 
Emeritus Professor James Lawson of the University of New South Wales and colleagues have found the same form of the human papillomavirus (HPV) associated with cervical cancer in almost half the breast tumour samples they tested.
Lawson says more research is needed to establish whether HPV is actually causing the breast cancer or if women with breast cancer are more prone to infection with the virus.
In a letter published online in the British Journal of Cancer last month Lawson reports that a review of the 2005 study found women with HPV positive breast cancers were on average about eight years younger than those whose tumours did not test positive to the virus.
Lawson says it isn't the first time a virus has been associated with breast cancer. 
The International Space Station now in orbit must readjust its path several times a year to avoid colliding with such debris; a chance hit with a spacewalking astronaut could prove fatal.
The two population groups were separated by a vast, cold, windswept, arid stretch of land that covered most of the continent, says Clendon, who was with the Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education when he published the research.
Until now, the reason why these two Aboriginal language groups are so different, each with a distinct grammar and vocabulary, has been a mystery.
He says the trend could be reversed, with serious implications for Australia, if Asian emissions are reduced.
"But when we did these simulations ... without the aerosols we got a completely different rainfall response over Australia.
The final test was similar, only this time the individuals were presented with 30 pairs of vertical lines.
Morning and evening-oriented people may follow other schedules, due to work, school and other demands, but their preferred schedule is more in sync with this internal clock, which may be partly determined by genetics.
He suggests that the observed differences in creativity might have to do with the fact that evening people also tend to be more extroverted than morning and intermediate types.
He says the WMO compared this year's temperatures with instrumental records dating back to 1861 and palaeoclimate data extending back thousands of years.
High temperatures and low rainfall through 2006, combined with an El Ni&ntilde;o, brought severe drought to much of southern Australia.
Somalia is currently suffering the worst flooding in recent history with some places receiving more than six times the average monthly rainfall, affecting hundreds and thousands of people.
Circumcising men cuts their risk of being infected with HIV in half, and could prevent hundreds of thousands or even millions of new infections, researchers say.
Results of the first major study on the issue were reported last year out of South Africa, with researchers seeing a 60% reduction in HIV risk for circumcised men. Researchers view the results of the new trial as strong confirmation. 
Experts say the prevalence of male circumcision varies by region in African countries south of the Sahara, with large numbers of men in some areas remaining uncircumcised. 
Another study is under way in Uganda assessing HIV infection risk for women with circumcised partners. 
Of the 39.5 million people worldwide infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, 24.7 million are in sub-Saharan Africa. About 25 million people have died from AIDS since it was first identified a quarter century ago.
Gliding squirrel-like mammals that lived with the dinosaurs at least 130 million years ago may have conquered the skies around the same time as birds, or even earlier, scientists say.
The oldest previously known gliding mammal was a rodent. Bats took to the skies with powered flight about 51 million years ago. But the new gliding mammal is not a direct ancestor of any other living mammals.  
Black dogs in this breed are the second most aggressive, while particolour (white with patches of colour) are more mild-mannered.
"It is very important to give the dog an optimum and suitable environment in order to have a dog with a low dominance aggressive behaviour level," he says.
Sisson says there are 29 recognised different coat colours for English cocker spaniels, and combinations other than golds mating with golds can result in a golden dog.
P&eacute;rez-Guisado and his colleagues next plan to study the English springer spaniel and English cocker spaniel genomes to pinpoint common genes associated with so-called dog rage and colouration.
Hundreds of planetary nebulae with intriguing shapes like this helix nebula have been found by an Australian-led team
"Planetary nebulae are the death throes of stars," says Parker, who is also with the Anglo-Australian Observatory. 
The gas the dying star ejects interacts with the environment around it, such as the interstellar medium, to form weird and wonderful shapes.
They tested the theory by looking at how many seeds were produced by intensively tapped trees in southwestern Eritrea compared with untapped trees, and their germination rates.
"Furthermore tapped trees produced smaller fruits with seeds of lower weight and reduced vitality than non-tapped trees."
Embryonic stem cells have been harvested from mouse embryos produced without sperm
The word comes from Latin and Greek roots meaning virgin beginning and the process occurs when an egg cell starts dividing to produce an embryo without using sperm to fertilise it. 
Scientists have experimented with parthenogenesis in mice before, but this is the first time that the procedure has yielded the embryonic stem cells or so-called master cells that have the potential to develop into any other type of cell in the body. 
"For instance, a woman with a genetic condition - some kind of early-onset Parkinson's, bone marrow failure - you could use them as an in vitro model of the disease," he says.
Still, Daley cautions that there are safety concerns with the procedure, which requires the egg to be chemically tricked into spitting out half its genetic material, leaving it with one set of female chromosomes. 
Still, Daley and his team have begun experimenting with the procedure in human eggs, using eggs discarded by women undergoing in vitro fertilisation treatment at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital.
The research team plans to recruit female volunteers to donate their eggs for research purposes a year or so from now, with the hope that these eggs will deliver better results.
When magnetic fields in the Sun coalesce in dark regions called sunspots they can explode sending a blast of radiation. Such solar flares reach Earth within minutes.
The flare and CME alter the ionosphere, the outermost part of Earth's atmosphere, and cause problems with communication systems.
He says communication with GPS navigation satellites in the lower ionosphere was blacked out for up to two hours.
Most existing wireless sensor networks are built with small devices called motes.
"This is a major problem. Since these systems exist in the real world, the dynamics and unpredictability often require new solutions," says Professor Jack Stankovic of the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, who is not associated with the research.
Once equipped with the software, individual sensors in a network can detect an environmental condition and communicate with the neighbouring sensors.
In a real-life situation, a firefighter could potentially tap into the network with a PDA and learn where the fire is and how intense it is.
They built the material on a surface coated with gold nanocrystals, which allowed the germanium to nucleate and grow.
If the wire was one centimetre in diameter it could hold up to 100 tonnes without breaking, he says.
While herbivorous species like the parrotfish and surgeon fish only nibbled disinterestedly at the algae, the batfish (Platax pinnatus) turned up and cleared the weed within two months.
Reporting in the journal Current Biology today, Bellwood describes the batfish as a "sleeping functional group", or a species with a hitherto unrecognised role in reef life.
The idea behind open source development is to allow anyone to copy, modify and redistribute ordinarily secret information about a technology without paying royalties to the original developers.
The hope is that, unrestrained by patents and other conventional restrictions such as profit margin, marketing and technology, a community of experts will come up with fresh solutions.
"It would be a great idea to combine the idea of open source with the idea of hardware, and a car is hardware that is interesting."
The study also found that there was a 41% decrease in risk for MS with every increase of 50 nanomoles per litre of circulating vitamin D. 
It is more common among people with northern European ancestry, according to the US National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
The illness can be relapsing and remitting or progressive, with symptoms that range from fatigue and slurred speech to tremors, stiffness, poor coordination and in the most severe cases paralysis.
What do dog barks have in common with bird tweets and human baby cries?
In general, high-pitched barks with longer intervals between each bark were rated as less aggressive than lower-pitched barks heard in frequent succession.
Since the people in the dog study also linked barks signifying despair, happiness and playfulness, the researchers suspect dogs and humans share a unique ability to communicate with one another that goes beyond the proposed universal mammal 'language'.
The scientists believe years of domestication have improved the way that dogs, versus their wolf ancestors, can communicate with us.
Common house cats also appear to have evolved improved means of communicating with humans, according to a study conducted by Cornell University researcher Nicholas Nicastro. Cats, however, seem more intent on manipulating us.
But he admits dogs might be able to communicate with us through their barks.
Such a visual experience with digital files could fuel the music industry in new ways, says Ichiro Fujinaga, associate professor at the Schulich School of Music at McGill University in Montreal, who is not associated with the research.
The software analyses certain features from the audio signal, such as how much bass or treble exists and sound patterns that have to do with rhythm and tempo. Then the program clusters similar sounding pieces into regions of music.
Museum goers will be able to play with music files already stored in the computer or download their own files to see what their collection looks like.
"Observing the cosmic infrared background is like watching distant fireworks from within a brightly lit city," says Kashlinsky. 
The results suggest that there may be a microbial component to obesity. But scientists do not yet know if people start out with lower levels of bacteroidetes or firmicutes that may make them prone to obesity. 
Flora has never mated, or even mixed, with a male dragon, and fertilised all the eggs herself, a process culminating in parthenogenesis, or virgin birth.
Scientists thought she had been able to store sperm from her earlier encounter with a male.
But after hearing about Flora's eggs, researchers conducted tests that showed her eggs were also produced without male help. 
"You have two institutions within a few short months of each other having a previously unheard of event. It is really quite unprecedented," says Buley. 
"The genetics of self-fertilisation in lizards means that all her hatchlings would have to be male. These would grow up to mate with their own mother and therefore, within one generation, there would potentially be a population able to reproduce normally on the new island," Buley says.
It was a sauropod, the familiar kind of dinosaur with a long neck, long tail and massive body that walked on four stout legs. 
Researchers have found DNA associated with nanoparticles from kidney stones. Could these strange particles be nanobacteria?
Previous research has found such particles in human serum, urine, renal cysts from patients with kidney disease, as well as in kidney stones.
"There definitely is DNA associated with [the nanoparticles]," he says. "But is that a contaminant?"
total=2188
